
Boyd Rice, that provocative Gnostic, desperately needs to go over the terms of his latest contract with the man downstairs-- he's getting a raw deal. After, I dunno, about a billion marginally more successful releases as Non, Rice's latest shout-out to Ol' Scratch, Children of the Black Sun, is bleak, "cinematic", and entirely un-fucking-listenable. I wouldn't call myself a fan of his earlier work, but before this burnt offering Rice could at least be counted on to produce albums of texture, substance, or even both-- each the absolute lifeblood of experimental music. The majority of this album, however, sounds like whatever noise I imagine might be produced by playing a vinyl record scratched to pure white.

Now I know how it feels to die for my audience. I've listened to this album several times, each listen more painful than the last, in an effort to warn you as effectively as I possibly can to stay away from it. Allow me to itemize the debt (you can count the sounds on this album without even taking off your shoes): an large brass section tunes-up on a single continuous tone for four minutes on "Black Sun"; a half-dozen extremely "dramatic" guitar notes are plucked on "Serpent of the Heavens"; three vocal samples, some rain... there might be a bee somewhere! Sweet crispy Christ, at least Receive the Flame had helicopters! Regardless, these noises only account for about 10% of the album. The other 90% is an irritatingly constant hum that fluctuates between "whine" and "causes brain cancer".

Oh, wait! Maybe I spoke too soon! There's also a DVD with a Dolby 5.1 mix on it! That's good, maybe the other 3.1 channels are the ones with the freakin' sounds on them. I can't wait to try this...

...Thirty-one minutes later, and my ordeal with this pile of aural leakage is finally complete. Now I can say with certainty that the only thing worse than enduring the low-level bass drone in two channels is being surrounded by it. Two channels won't confuse the basic fight-or-flight response provoked by this vacuum of an album because at least you'll know which way to run. Not so with the Dolby mix-- you won't know where to turn when this steaming pile comes at you from every direction at once! It's scarier than Jason X! But more frightening still is that someone thought this was a good idea. Rice's denser, less awful past work could benefit from this technology, but it's wasted here.

Now, if I were in a really generous mood, I would give Rice the benefit of the doubt and say that he was trying to produce something along the lines of Coil's drone masterwork Time Machines. I would also say, of course, that he neglected to realize the necessity of the hypnotic elements at work below the surface of its simple, lulling sines and cosines, and attempted to generate a similar effect through random fluctuations in the constant thrum of Children. Naturally, this utterly, irrevocably fails. Without some sort of underlying organization to the drone, it resembles white noise and is readily tuned out, leaving little-to-nothing left to hold the listener. If that was Rice's aim, then, perhaps, he succeeds, but that the result is comprised of near-white noise is hardly something to smile about.

But you know what? I'll even go a step further. Rather than just bitching about how astoundingly empty this Non-release is, I'll offer a positive alternative (I'm Libra, I strive for balance). Go to the kitchen and find two appliances-- toasters, cuisinarts, blenders, what have you. Hold one in each hand. Smash them together for fifteen minutes. Now you've just had as much fun (if not more) than listening to Children of the Black Sun, and in half the time. Don't say I never gave you anything.

Worst release of 2005. Beyond awful. Listen, I know a lot of people out these parts didn't dig DFA79's mini-metalisms on You're A Woman, I'm A Machine-- too hard, too soft, too boring, not boring enough, vaguely misogynistic, etc. You wrote these things to me and I have all your emails in a file somewhere.

But understand a simple, if not mathematical fact about this two-piece bass-and-drum duo: By necessity their songs have little to them. They're efficient bursts of less-is-more rock that ride riffs hard then cut out right before they stale. I'd have thought at least one motherfucker tapped for this turkey-shot remix project would have figured that out. Instead we get Justice on some reverso Advantage shit, making "Blood on Your Hands" sound like the theme to Super Pitfall, and that game's the fucking worst.

Hey, let's talk Bloc Party's Silent Alarm Remixed, from which we might pretend Romance Bloody Romance took some Ps and Qs. SAR, remember, featured a different producer doing up a different track from the Bloc's debut. Then it came sequenced just like Silent Alarm, and a few of us (me) actually liked it better than the original LP-- more variety, less helicopters, etc. SAR at least made sense, since every Bloc track physically had a bunch of possible reconfigurations. Romance, meanwhile, has four telling remixes of "Black History Month" (the band's worst song), three of "Romantic Rights", an OK new song and a cover of former Peel favorite La Peste's "Better Off Dead". Inexplicably, nobody behind the papers realized after the second or third dude asked to remix "Black History Month" that maybe, maybe, DFA79's songs aren't suited for the full-on remix treatment-- they don't need it either.

Listen, I respect the renewed interest in tripping up rock-kid disco homophobia (still rampant) with these Phoned-in remix blitzes of late. Vice Records, seems, is fighting the good fight. But the Braxe/Falke and Dählback joints here are so flimsy, that vocoder'd out Makuziak futuro-disco bullshit so obnoxiously tongue-in-cheek, I can't imagine anybody really psyched to hit up his neighb Fixed or Making Time party to try out his new Diesel hightops on the dancefloor. Final Fantasy's string arrangements for "Black History" have their charm, sure, but only Trash's Erol Alkan turns in the album's non-bomb, a simple edit of "Romantic Rights" that overlays percussion tracks for an intro and flips the vocal track a disorienting half-step early. Which is saying something: If the game is to make rock tracks playable in clubs, why fuck with them more than you have to? What's so bad about disco edits?

The cover of Vue's self-titled debut full-length looks pretty damned nice. It's a simple black- and-white photo, featuring a dark-haired girl facing away from the camera, staring out onto an endless black-and-white beach. It's somber and cosmic, conjuring images of those freaky 1920's German expressionist silent films. It's subdued, restrained and, in a weird, bleak way, kind of beautiful.

Given all of this album's subliminal, smooth cover-art warm-up, it's a damn shame that Vue's music couldn't sound a little more like a silent film. However, after building up listeners' hopes for a cool, artsy album with their cool, artsy cover, Vue instead turn around and piss in everyone's eye by dishing out 11 tracks of smarmy, glitzy, flash-and-trash rock music. Sounding like a strange blend of soulless southern rock, lazy college rock and bad, bad late 70's glam-rock, Vue's music blends everything that is already wrong about rock music with their own even worse Euro-trash tendencies. This album gives rock music such a bad name that it makes me wonder if these silly fuckers might not be the indie rock Antichrists, sent here to destroy good rock music for us all.

After listening to the first few songs of the album, I little voice in my head started saying, "You've heard all of this before." "But," I replied to the voice, "if I had ever heard music this bad before in my life, I'm sure I would have remembered it." The voice spoke back, saying, "Ah, listen more closely, grasshopper." That's when it hit me. I had heard music this awful before, but I'd never heard so much awful stuff squeezed into such a tiny space-- so much concentrated shit making such a shamelessly terrible final product.

Mixing the irritating pretension of a Sonic Youth spoken word track with a grungier Mott the Hoople, Vue is so cluttered with nonsense that listening to it is an exercise in patience. The five-member band produces an amazingly empty and joyless sound. There's no fun or electricity whatsoever. The songs have all the thematic range of a 2 Live Crew album (sex, boys, weird chicks, boys and sex) and all the lyrical ingenuity of a Bon Jovi b-side. With this delicate mixture of musical crap and verbal crap firmly set, Vue manage to set new a standard for complete and utter sonic retardation. The result is music that's about as subtle as a flying mallet and half as much fun to listen to.

Taken separately, the pieces of this music suck just as much as the whole. Frontman Rex Shelverton, isn't so much singing as he is painfully over-emoting unconvincingly. Using irritating repetition and endless vocal effects to try and disguise his toneless whine, Rex screeches his way emotionlessly through the album's 41 long, long minutes. The most profound line Shelverton manages on the entire record is, "Try, try, try, try" from "We Were Here." Though, the three separate songs in which a chorus builds around slight variations of the line, "I want to see you undress," are nice, too. Apparently, Rex didn't think anyone would pay much attention to his lyrics, either.

Every track on Vue sounds identical to the last. Its opening track, "White Traffic," blows the band's wad early in the game, running through Vue's very small bag of tricks within the first 20 seconds of the record. So the rest of the album, on top of being lame, isn't even surprisingly lame-- it's just lame. You could listen to this unmanageable pile of crap backwards and it would make as much sense as if you played it straight through.

I firmly believe that there should be some sort of legal penalty for making an album this bad. We could say that it's slanderous against all rock music, then we could start dishing out some much-deserved ass-kicking. Maybe Sub Pop should have to pay us all punitive damages and Vue should be forced to be pick up trash along the highway. This just goes to prove my theory that if new bands were forced to take some sort of written test before we let them in the studio-- possible an essay exam-- we'd never have to worry about Cro-Magnons like this making an album this worthless again.

Whenever I see that line pop up in a review, I think the same thing: "Too fucking lazy to think of anything to say." (And how come this sentence only seems to be popping up in every 20th review I read? Either we're too high to think or that higher intelligence shit is becoming good friends with our other disappearing pal Civility. Anyhow...) What if some architects started up a radio station? Would they thereby teach us a new way of dancing, and will Peter Criss' solo album be the soundtrack?

Um, no.

Come on, did you really think so? Yeah, Ringo has "Octopus' Garden," but Criss had "Beth." Okay. That's your solo project in a nutshell. Alas, since each member of Kiss had to release a solo album, it came to be that Peter Criss had to poop one out.

I really take the bullet for you people sometimes. Fuckin' A, have you heard this thing? The song "You Matter to Me" is Peter's subliminal disco pipeline into cocaine- fueled shit songwriting, and it's one of the many songs that Criss didn't write. While he did co-write half of the songs, it took more people to yank out the carburetor and pour sugar into this solo vehicle. Michael Morgan, Sean Delaney, and John Vastano are just some of the many fantastic contributors that, thanks to this album, will be forever known to the collective masses as "Who?"

As the years go by, albums come, albums go, and once in a while they blow. And the wind cries Peter.

If this album wasn't the inspiration for Spinal Tap's "Stonehenge," I don't know what was. Grasping at straws, Kiss rehired Destroyer producer Bob Ezrin and wanted him to help crank out the hits. Ah, but the band was living in the age of early '80s metal, and the man at the soundboard was not only the same man who produced the most "far out" of the Kiss albums, but whose last project was Pink Floyd's The Wall. Ezrin made the boneheaded suggestion of ditching their new rock tunes and instead recording a concept album about a young hero's quest to slay an elf, or something to that effect.

Of course, the end product is the absolute nadir of Kiss' existance. I know, you all think albums like Anamalyze or Hot In The Shade qualify, but no. Those records were Kiss going with the flow of crap music. With The Elder, they pushed crap in a new and scary direction. Oddly enough, three of the songs were co-written by Lou Reed and they still sound as anonymous as the others. What a horrible, horrible, horrible album.

No, I have not forgotten to put the numbers into the rating spaces above. In over two years of writing for Pitchfork, I've waited for the one album that would warrant a 0.0-- perhaps even covet the lesser o.o. In my five years of reading Pitchfork, I can only remember a couple of 0.0s, likely spouting from the scalding keyboard of Jason Josephes. Now, finally, my generation has its Metal Machine Music-- an unfathomable album which will be heard in the squash courts and open mic nights of deepest hell. At least Lou Reed had the good grace to keep his mouth shut on his grinding hallmark of pretentious ejaculation.

We Chicagoans are stubbornly proud. We shout insults to New York with mouths full of all-beef hot dogs and Old Style beer. This general resentment mostly stems from being dubbed "The Second City." However, landmarks like NYC Ghosts & Flowers refocus our dislike with greater alacrity. Sonic Youth's umpteenth album wads everything we hate about New York into one convenient tissue. The only thing missing is the Mets. Sonic Youth remind us that white New Yorkers still grow soul-patches and goatees, wear berets and Rastafarian caps, dine on grilled tofu in an emulsification of goat butter and kumquat, and watch Dutch documentaries about fisting, thinking it's original, intellectual, or influential.

These 40+ year olds continue to operate under the perception that they matter. However, one of the prerequisites for being "experimental" or "underground" is that, down the road, somebody has to be influenced by the work and appropriate elements into the common collective. The minimal noodling on NYC Ghosts & Flowers merely retreads the rancid corpses of beat poetry and avant-garde noise.

In a way, Sonic Youth's offenses are no different than, say, the Bloodhound Gang's. Where the Bloodhound Gang push recycled Beastie Boys and "South Park" jokes on will-less consumers, Sonic Youth scrap together Yoko Ono, Glenn Branca, and Allen Ginsberg into major label product. But just like living in the Big Apple, you're merely paying more for it. These are not new ideas. These are ideas that were arrogant and unlistenable upon birth 30 years ago. Sonic Youth are even old enough to know that! Thurston Moore stuck the sleeves of John Cage albums into his spokes and Kim Gordon played house with her Kathy Acker action figures.

Shockingly, aside from some distorted crescendos on "Renegade Princess" and "Nevermind," the volume here is kept at a muted minimum. Flashing and bleating overrules chords. Now neither word in the name "Sonic Youth" is apt. A "song" might be merely thwacking a bass repeatedly ("side2side") or rubbing callused fingers over gainless guitar strings (mostly everything else).

The horror-score chiming of "Free City Rhymes" comes closest to older Sonic Youth-- or at least the worst moments from A Thousand Leaves-- and features the album's only qualified 'singing.' Elsewhere, it's straight spoken word (or in Gordon's case, grunted), the quality of which brings to mind freshman poetry classes where that one Doors worshiper recites beat prose to the general embarrassment of the entire class. Each line is a prime example, but some demand extra warning. For example, Kim Gordon moans (in lowercase): "boys go to jupiter to get more stupider/ girls go to mars, become rock stars," before daring God with the closing, "strike me down/ strike me down/ with lightning." Her underwear fascination continues on "side2side" with sighs of "bra" and "special/ underwear."

Producer Jim O'Rourke keeps the guitars thin and the electronic bleeps ready in a Hefty sack while Thurston drops his voice into comedic Norse mumbling on "streamXsonic subway." In a rushed cadence, he spits cyberpunk mumbo-jumbo like, "clipped on my streetmatick clogs/ pushed thru the hyped-out fervent fogs/ found my way with sensoid jogs/ new radio structure." Picture this barked over what sounds like a riding mower running over a line of Tonka trucks. Whoever stole Sonic Youth's equipment, please give it back. Or, perhaps you didn't steal enough. And this being democratic badness, Lee Ranaldo speaks hilarious William S. Burroughs impersonations on the title track. "Hey did any of you freaks here ever remember Lenny," he asks as if wearing a trenchcoat in a opium den.

As Chip Chanko pointed out:
Sonic Youth = communism
Daydream Nation = Russian Revolution
Experimental Jet Set = Hunt for Red October

So, essentially: an idea that seemed right on paper and in initial, riotous action, but one that has since corroded into a hollow sham. Plus, one could only wish Sonic Youth even approached the sound of Daydream Nation here. Instead, we're left with structures based on toggling the pickup selector on a Fender. The last two lackluster albums at least left beautiful epics like "Diamond Sea" and "Hits of Sunshine," but this record merely squirts out electro-duck quacks over nothingness on the opening to "Lightnin'." Everything down to the grammar and paintings inside is lamentable. Peppering speech with 'fuck' and typing "that's whatchoo got crawling in yr panic net" fails to qualify as inventive or hip these days. Melody and harmony have been banned in Sonic Youth's camp. Merit badges are now awarded for bleeding squeaks from amps and rhyming 'punk' with 'slunk.'

A 0.0 is monumental. I have to keep questioning this decision, but the evidence is there. It takes a giant to fall and make this big of a splash. Home movies may be sloppy, but titanic disasters like Hudson Hawk and Bonfire of the Vanities go down in history when even the dam of skill, better judgment, and experience fails to stymie the flood of bile. Sonic Youth seem intent on staying in New York, and Ghosts & Flowers sounds like a conceptual dedication to their home. New York, their mother, should even feel ashamed. Chicago sleeps soundly knowing we didn't produce such an album... doh! Jim O'Rourke! Just move, already!

If more drunks would learn from Robert Pollard, simply accept his teachings, alcoholism wouldn't be treated-- it would be celebrated. An alcoholic risks losing his family and his job, systematically alienating all who would ever respect or care for him; Robert Pollard is loved, adored, and urine-free. Surely this career arc is the very embodiment boozing success, a seminal text on how to drink professionally for more than a decade.

The secret directions to the Bizarro dimension Pollard inhabits, however, have until now been well-concealed, only unearthed from the occasional between-song words of wisdom doled out at GBV gigs, and impossible to accurately assemble into a true life-plan. With the tearful passing of GBV's live act, it seemed as though the teachings would be lost forever, but listen up, drunky, because there's hope: Relaxation of the Asshole, like the Rosetta Stone of Inebriation, is the first step towards making sense of the the Man, the Wisdom, and the ins and outs of a healthy career in alcoholism.

Yes, this most definitely is a CD of stage banter, Uncle Bob's rants, and nothing but. Let the record show that you have been warned: The only precedent I can think of (and painstakingly verified by minutes of searching) is Having Fun on Stage With Elvis. Now, if anyone deserves that treatment more than Elvis (and lots do, for sure-- we should make a rule that 20 years of touring and at least one band member with a substance abuse problem makes one of these albums mandatory), it's Uncle Bob.

The similarities are manifest, as both have performed some of the most classic rock songs of all time (of, uh, varying levels of renown). The difference, of course, is that at the time of Elvis' recording, he was a pill-addled super-heavyweight surrounded with yes-men eager to milk a buck from a fan base dumb enough to pay for an album of "thank ya"'s and "uh-huh"'s, while, conversely, every time Bob bitches about Adam Duritz, I kind of secretly wish that he was my dad.

And by now you've surely seen the rating. On the scale of artist indulgence, and by any other measure for that matter, this is a solid 10.0 if ever there was one, friends. This-- this-- is a 10 as surely as Metal Machine Music is a 10, as surely as Having Fucking Fun on Stage With Elvis is a 10, as surely as any exercise so bafflingly, inexplicably, unintentionally and intentionally hilarious even in concept is a 10; good god-- what the hell else can this album receive? The rating is inconsequential. It's either a 10 or a zero, and considering Bob is the reigning king of intoxicated concert rambling it's sure as hell not a zero, m'man. A single listen will verify this. Behold!

"Rolling Stone just published a list of the top 100 guitar players of all time-- and they included Joan Jett. How can you fuckin' put Joan Jett in the top 100 guitar players of all time? Ahead of Pete Townshend! Rolling Stone sucks! They can blow me forever! If anyone here is from Rolling Stone they can blow me. You want some payola? Here's some payola, motherfuckers!"

Gold.

"To everyone that says we have a drinking problem, we say 'Fuck you.' I said it to my mom."

Golder.

"I wanna know how the guy from the Counting Crows used to fuck everybody from 'Friends'? How the fuck'd he do it? He's an ugly motherfucker! He's fatter than me! What the fuck's he got? Money."

See?! This isn't some album you listen to because you enjoy listening to it, let alone more than once-- oh no. This isn't the summer jam for a cruise round the OC or the soundtrack to your formative years as a misunderstood adolescent. This is a long-view textbook interspersed with cheering and unintelligible phrases; you study it, you internalize it, and then you go forth and lead a better life. Subsequent listens are irrelevant-- why keep meditating once you've reached nirvana? When it comes to drinking for a living, you learned from the best; never look back.

In early 2012, the music director of a Norwegian state-funded radio station called P3 declined to add a song called "Inspector Norse" by disco producer Todd Terje to its rotation, saying it sounded like "background music at a beach bar." When an interviewer asked him what he thought about the radio station's description, Terje said he agreed with it. "It sounds like elevator music. Good, danceable elevator music." Then, in a pun fit only for hypothetical dads, he added, "Elevate your body!" In Terje's world, there is no distinction made between beating and joining—it's all join, join, join.

It's Album Time is, as advertised, his first full-length album. The title sets the tone: Casual, confident, and unburdened by the imagined need for significance that scares so many good dance producers into losing their cool when given a bigger platform. Most of the music on it could be classified as disco, with shades of cocktail lounge, exotica, surf instrumentals, and other styles that favor whimsy and novelty over sober artistic expression. Not that Terje isn't an artist—he is, and a careful one, fluent in history, expert with texture, and with a grasp on composition more akin to a 1960s film composer than a contemporary techno producer. But for as much ground as he covers on It's Album Time, the music feels effortless, gliding from Henry Mancini-esque detective jazz to bouncy, Stevie Wonder funk like breeze blowing through the waffle weave of a leisure suit. Conventional wisdom bears out: The looser the grip, the tighter the hold.

Despite recycling four of its twelve tracks from previously released singles and EPs, It's Album Time has a linear, cohesive feel. Instead of trying to top "Strandbar" or "Inspector Norse", Terje ties them together with short interstitial tracks—valleys that give perspective to the mountains. If he ever capitulates to the conventions of making a full-length album, it's in structure, which here is less redolent of disco than classic-rock pranksters like Paul McCartney or Frank Zappa: an introduction that features men whispering the words "It's album time" repeatedly, peaking with a ballad halfway through; closing with the joyous "Inspector Norse", and dying away to the sound of distant applause.

Terje is, at heart, a comedian. "I like my music very fruity," he told Resident Advisor in 2007. "Lots of percussion, lots of silly effects." When I interviewed the illustrator Bendik Kaltenborn, who has drawn the covers for most of Terje's releases including It's Album Time, he told me that the two first bonded over what Kaltenborn called a "Stupid" sense of humor. Everything about It's Album Time and Terje's self-presentation—whether it's the fart-like synth sounds, the conga-line enthusiasm, or the promo photos of him flexing his minor biceps with a pout on his face—is so studiously carefree that he sometimes seems less like a human being than an all-night party incarnate.

But like all comedy, Terje's act is held together by a taut thread of sadness. The beauty of his music is the beauty of a neon sign outside a cheap motel: It's kitschy but it knows it, and in its kitsch conveys both loneliness (it's dark outside and you've been driving for hours) and its easy resolution (it's warm inside and happy hour never ends, pink paper umbrella gratis). In the mockumentary-style video for Terje's "Inspector Norse" (which is excerpted from a Norwegian short film called Whateverest), a failed electronic musician living with his elderly father in a small town spends a day bowling and cooking drugs from household chemicals before turning out the lights and dancing to "Inspector Norse", alone. Afterwards, he wanders the streets in facepaint, confused, crying. He survives mostly on illusions, and without happy music, he'd be lost.

The album's least representative song is the one that sticks with me the most: A cover of the Robert Palmer ballad "Johnny and Mary," sung by Roxy Music singer Bryan Ferry. The song is heavy, melancholic, and almost oppressively romantic—moods that the rest of It's Album Time feel designed to make you forget about. The lyrics tell the story of a couple who know they're alienated from each other but have hung on for so long they struggle with whether or not to break up. "Johnny's always running around, trying to find certainty," the opening line goes. "He needs all the world to confirm that he ain't lonely/ Mary counts the walls, knows he tires easily."

Ferry has spent his entire career crying crocodile tears, exploring the ways a seemingly insincere performance can ring with more feeling and pathos than something we recognize as "real". His voice—once a dazzling, cartoonish instrument, like Elvis with his finger in a wall socket—sounds hollowed-out and whispery, an old man whose wisdom brings him no comfort. In the original song, Palmer seems to hover above the characters, observing them, maybe even judging. Ferry sounds like he's in the next room, suffering troubles of his own.

As the song crests and the rippling arpeggios of Terje's synths reach their climax, you might wonder: What is a song so sad doing on an album so relentlessly upbeat? Not to ruin the mood, I think—only as a reminder that sadness is a choice. You could be "Inspector Norse" if you wanted to, peacocking wild across the dancefloor, spilling drinks on a stranger, recognizing the brevity of life by enjoying it. From an artist like Terje, it's proof that he could go deep if he wanted to. He'd just rather have fun.

With 2012’s colossal The Seer, Swans released a record that seemed designed to test the commitment of the band’s most ardent followers yet expanded their audience to an unprecedented degree. Michael Gira seems aware that anticipation for a new Swans album has never been greater, so he’s responded in the best way possible: by producing a record that is every bit The Seer’s equal.

Swans were hardly the first 1980s underground-rock fixtures to resurface in the new millennium, and they’re not the only ones who've resisted the nostalgic trappings of reunion tours to make a respectable showing as a rebooted recording act. But they are the rare band of their vintage who seem less concerned with living up to or building upon a past legacy than establishing a completely different one. In retrospect, the 14 years that elapsed between 1996’s Soundtracks for the Blind and 2010’s My Father Will Guide Me Up a Rope to the Sky were less a break-up-induced hiatus than a gestation period. The bigger, brawnier Swans that Michael Gira has assembled in its wake (complete with a strapping, bare-chested gong-smasher named Thor) are beholden neither to the primordial, industrialized sludge of the band’s infamous ’80s catalogue nor the post-goth serenity of their ’90s work. Instead, they’ve perfected a new means of transforming grostequerie into grandeur and vice versa.

With 2012’s astonishingly colossal The Seer, Swans pulled off the unlikeliest of coups: A record that, over its six sides and two-hour-plus running time, was seemingly designed to test the commitment of the band’s most ardent followers yet, amazingly, expanded their audience to an unprecedented degree. (This summer, Swans are even playing the odd free festival date in outdoor public squares, which could conceivably earn them a few new fans in the grandparents-and-strollers demographic.) But while Swans have always been the last band to pander to audience expectations, Gira nonetheless seems aware that anticipation for a new Swans album has arguably never been greater. And so he’s responded in the best way possible: by producing a record that, in structure and scale, is every bit The Seer’s equal, yet possessed by a peculiar energy and spirit that proves all the more alluring in its dark majesty.

The relationship between the two albums can essentially be gauged by their respective album covers. Though there’s a similarity in composition, To Be Kind’s artwork trades *The Seer’*s dark shadows for a bright mustard tone, and the central feral-dog figure for cute baby faces (as rendered in a series of six by L.A. painter Bob Biggs), suggesting a more approachable ethos at play. But as any new parent can tell you, an infant is as volatile and destructive a creature as the wildest of field animals and, likewise, the John Congleton-produced To Be Kind boasts a more focused attack—with a preminum on taut, throbbing grooves and blackened blues—that initially tricks you into thinking it's more accessible than its predecessor. (Hey, there's even a song named in honour of Kirsten Dunst.) Yet it’s ultimately accessible in the same way a prison gate is accessible—getting in is relatively easy; getting out unscathed is an entirely different story. Upon hearing the introductory Cajun-funk strut of “A Little God in My Hands”, I initially worried that Swans were crossing over into the sort of campy, Southern-fried creepiness you’d hear on the soundtrack to an episode of "True Blood". But after that destabilizing blast of brass and synapse-frying synth beam appears out of nowhere at the 90 second mark, “A Little God in My Hands” carries on as if infected by a virus; it tries to keep its cool, but the once-sprightly rhythmic bounce is now ridden with a nervous tension, while the encroaching chorus of dead-eyed female voices transform the song into a mutant-zombie version of its former self. On To Be Kind, this is what constitutes a lead single.

Close observers of Swans will notice that seven of the 10 songs here were previewed in some form on last year’s limited-edition concert album/demos collection Not Here/Not Now (whose sales funded the new album’s production). But most have since been subjected to dramatic embellishment or rearrangement. Not Here/Not Now’s tense, acoustic-strummed closing sketch “Screen Shot” has been recast as To Be Kind’s louche, slow-boiling “Yoo Doo Right”-styled opener and, in the process, illuminates the great contradiction at the core of the 21st-century Swans sound: as their sonic vocabulary has grown more elaborate and texturally detailed, Gira’s sense of melody has turned all the more minimalist and mantric. Thirty years ago on the deadpan dirge, “Job”, Gira sang from the perspective of the world’s most bored axe murderer (“Cut off the arms/ Cut off the legs/ Cut off the head/ Get rid of the body”) as a metaphor for soul-destroying, day-to-day workplace drudgery; on “Screen Shot,” he more eagerly sings of a different sort of dismemberment  (“No touch/ No loss/ No hands/ No sin”), of purging urges—and the body parts used to indulge them—as way to achieve a state of spiritual purity.

The ensuing songs on To Be Kind present variations on this theme—of unleashing an outsized sound to find an inner peace, and reclaiming one's innocence by way of insolence. But, of course, this being a Swans record, salvation never comes easy. When, amid the “Dirt”-covered funereal march of “I’m Just a Little Boy” Gira pleads, “I need loooooooooooove,” he’s answered by a Greek chorus of devious, derisive laughter. (Of all the terrible, humiliating experiences detailed in Swans songs over the years, that moment just might count as the cruelest.) And if the 34-minute centerpiece “Bring the Sun”/“Toussaint L’Ouverture” initially summons our planet’s primary life-source with all the trance-inducing elation and desperation of a remote-island pagan sect praying to their gods for a bountiful harvest, its more sinister second act—wherein Gira maniacally howls the name of the titular 18th-century Haitian revolutionary while drowning in a swamp of dub spewage—transforms the track into an after-hours seance gone wrong.

As it plays out, To Be Kind starts to resemble a cult procession unto itself, a mesmerizing spectacle of an omnipotent band whose sound continues to expand in scope and ranks swell in size. Much like The Seer, To Be Kind sees a formidable and evermore prominent coterie of female vocalists—from the insurgent Cold Specks to reigning freak-scene queen St. Vincent to avant-rock veteran Little Annie—falling under Swans’ sway. And rather than provide a calming counterpoint to Gira’s stentorian croon, their voices ultimately serve the album’s hypnotic force. From the teeth-gnashing ferocity of “Oxygen” to the calamitous, battering-rammed climax of “She Loves Us!”, To Be Kind adheres to a policy of transcendence by any means necessary, even if it means repeatedly bashing you in the face with a mallet until you’re seeing stars and colors.

On the hymn-like title-track closer, Gira solemnly repeats the words “to be kind” as both an aspirational self-help slogan and a tacit acknowledgement that, given all the diabolically orchestrated malevolence we’ve been subjected to over the preceding 112 minutes, he hasn’t always done the best job of heeding his own advice. But as the song violently erupts into one final, sustained surge of tectonic-plate-shifting discord, the moment proves to be as affirming as it is unsettling. “People always consider us to be very dour and depressing, but fuck that shit,” Gira told Pitchfork’s Brandon Stosuy in 2012. “The goal is ecstasy.” And what makes To Be Kind so compelling is how that goal seems both fully realized yet forever out of reach at the same time.

Aphex Twin's first album since 2001's Drukqs is sixty-five minutes of highly melodic, superbly arranged, precisely mixed, texturally varied electronic music that sounds like it could have come from no other artist. Syro absorbs many different sounds, from loping breakbeat to drum’n’bass to techno proper to hints of disco, but it has a way of making other genres seem like they exist to serve this particular vision.

It’s 2014 and there is a new Aphex Twin album, which means the most conspicuous musical drought this side of My Bloody Valentine has ended. Syro, unlike the Caustic Window LP released earlier this year, is not a collection of material cut during Richard James’ prolific 1990s heyday and shelved. It’s a new album of new music recorded in the last few years, and it’s said to be the first of more to come. Unlike MBV, it’s not that James went away entirely—in 2005, he released a series of Analord 12" EPs as AFX, and there were a couple of low-key EPs as the Tuss. But with many-monikered electronic musicians, branding is everything: it’s not an Aphex Twin release unless it’s presented as an Aphex Twin release.

Syro is an unusual album to contemplate because its overall approach is not particularly unusual. Older fans of electronic music who followed along with James’ shape-shifting in the 1990s may need to adjust their expectations slightly. On the evidence here, he has no interest in re-inventing his sound. Syro has few extremes, no hyper-intense splatter-breaks or satanic “Come to Daddy” vocals or rushes of noise. On the other end of the spectrum, Syro doesn’t cast James in a quasi-classical light; there's no “serious composer” tracks like “4” or “Girl/Boy Song” that beg to be arranged for string quartet. And there are no “Windowlicker”-like nods to pop, no attempts to smuggle some truly weird music onto the charts.

Without all that, what’s left? Sixty-five minutes of highly melodic, superbly arranged, precisely mixed, texturally varied electronic music that sounds like it could have come from no other artist. James throughout the ’90s was an influence sponge; part of his genius was how he took ideas and ran them through his highly idiosyncratic filter. The bizarro highlights came when he put his own spin on genres, making jungle weirder, pop more unsettling, and piano music more gorgeous. Syro also absorbs many different sounds, from loping breakbeat to drum’n’bass to techno proper to hints of disco, but in a more subtle way. It has a way of making other genres seem like they exist to serve this particular vision. And it’s a confident album precisely because it’s not self-consciously pushing the envelope. Electronic music with a strong beat not intended for the dancefloor was, if not invented by this guy, certainly perfected by him. So with his first trip back from the wilderness, he’s demonstrating exactly how it’s done.

Syro scans as “’90s” in terms of form but is quite modern in its particulars. Music sounded like this in 1996, but it didn’t sound quite this good. Whether James has acquired better machines or improved the way in which he records them, Syro contains some of his most tactile music; it’s a headphone record par excellence, an hour-long feast for the ears. But as exquisite as all the fragments are in isolation, the heart of the record is its steady sense of momentum, all the more remarkable since the tempos are mostly relaxed and uniform. James has spoken of tricks he uses in sequencing to free his music from a ridged digital grid; whatever his methods, his rhythmic DNA is as identifiable as John Bonham’s. There’s a playful swing to his rhythms, with accents that dance on and around the beat, and that unmistakable drive is the frame upon which the album is built.

The album’s formal simplicity keeps the focus on the arrangements, especially in the first half. The ten-and-a-half-minute “XMAS_EVET10 [120][thanaton3 mix]” glides forward like a smooth stone over polished ice, allowing a new element—a sly melodic twist, a stuttering shift in the beat, an unusually bassy groan—to enter seamlessly in every bar. It’s complicated but never busy, myriad parts cohering into a logical whole. “4 bit 9d api+e+6 [126.26]” mixes muted acid squelches with twinkly keyboard melodies, with barely-there voices intoning a few layers beneath, while the opening “minipops 67 [120.2][source field mix]” has wordless singing presented straight—the one new wrinkle on the album—and it’s so naked it’s disarming. The album gets a few clicks harsher in places, as on “CIRCLONT6A [141.98][syrobonkus mix]”, with its assertive bass grind and rubbery video game noises, but it never goes too far in that direction. The care and virtuosity with which these tracks were assembled is immediately obvious, but nothing feels difficult; the record’s easy flow despite it all is one of its primary virtues, and there’s something new to uncover with every listen.

Syro’s tremendous focus on detail marks it as a more muted release in Aphex Twin’s discography. The “What the hell was that?”, once an Aphex touchstone, is nowhere to be found; there’s little here in the way of brute-force appeals to the lizard brain, and Syro is on balance more sophisticated and cerebral. And that silliness, that bratty desire to be noticed, was part of what made the Aphex Twin experience special. Some will miss it. But this record—virtuosic, precise, but also alive with feeling—has something else in mind. It’s telling that the most extreme moment here is also the quietest—the closing “aisatsana [102]”, a painfully lovely minimalist piano piece recorded on a creaky upright with birds chirping away in the background. By that moment, the feeling of “I’m listening to a new Aphex Twin album” has fallen away and the deeper beauty of Syro starts to sink in.

Working with operatically trained vocalist Alison Skidmore, the Manchester producer has humanized his sound, made it more beautiful and richer on the surface while further accentuating its dark heart. The new dynamic leads to another big leap forward.

Andy Stott took his time getting here. The Manchester producer spent a good part of the last decade turning out solid tracks under his own name and under the alias Andrea. Though he always returned to dub techno, he flirted with a range of genres, from juke to house to dubstep, and some of his music was very good. But Stott never quite zeroed in on a unique voice. That changed in 2011 with the release of two short albums, Passed Me By and We Stay Together. Stott left behind the quicker tempos of dance proper, and slowing down allowed him to sink deeper into his music, where he found a new world of atmosphere and texture. Passed and Stay were heavy records that highlighted something new about the expressive power of bass. Dub techno, stretching back to its origins with the early-1990s Berlin project Basic Channel, tends to view the low end as a mysterious black sludge. Where bass in Skrillex-style EDM is a precision weapon, with drops punctuating the tracks and jacking up the mood in an instant, the bottom octave in dub techno is more of an enveloping presence. It's murkier, more oppressive, colder, something you wade through and push against. Which is why the inertia of the relentless 4/4 beat signifies energy whatever the tempo.

On his two 2011 releases, Stott found an unusual musicality in deep, foreboding bass. His music throbbed with the sooty remnants of industry and had obvious appeal for those interested in dark ambiance of any stripe; its all-consuming nature gave him a new audience beyond the realm of dance music. With his new album, Luxury Problems, he adds a few more wrinkles, and his music has become simultaneously more complex and more accessible. Working with operatically trained vocalist Alison Skidmore (Stott met her as a student when she taught him piano), he's humanized his sound, made it more beautiful and richer on the surface while further accentuating its dark heart. The new dynamic leads to another big leap forward for the producer.

Skidmore's voice is a versatile instrument in its own right, but Stott's looping and processing gives it even more flexibility. Though Luxury Problems has a consistent overall mood, the feel and structure of the individual tracks vary quite a bit, and the pieces featuring Skidmore find her singing pulled into all kinds of interesting shapes. The album opens with her in her most glassy and ethereal, as repetitions of her singing a single word, "touch," float through space like soap bubbles. The "ch" phoneme is looped and becomes the hi-hat on the track, and gradually the sounds assemble themselves into a ghosted version of a conventional dance rhythm. But when Stott's machine bass pulse enters just under halfway through, we realize we're in for a world of serious contrasts: "Numb" is delicate and gorgeous but has an undercurrent of menace, and the tension between these qualities is the record's essence.

If "Numb" is Skidmore at her most spectral, "Hatch the Plan" finds her sounding more grounded, almost in the mode of a singer-songwriter. The choral-like layering on "Plan" brings to mind School of Seven Bells and even Throwing Muses. But it's the longest track on the record and is purely instrumental-- mostly a deeply unsettling mix of bass churn and machine noises-- for its first two minutes. That it moves from pure soundscape to something close to a proper song is further evidence of Stott's confidence; none of these tracks feel like they have to be any one thing, they're always growing and changing and defying expectations.

"Lost and Found" has a similarly melodic approach, unspooling in a Middle Eastern mode and bringing to mind Dead Can Dance at their most subtle. We can hear Stott drawing lines between 4AD-style gothic new wave and dub techno, building bridges between sounds and ideas based on his understanding of the elements and moods that connect them. Elsewhere, on "Expecting", he goes further into abstraction, constructing an intensely dark and ominous atmosphere that bring to mind the ice-cold isolationist drone of Thomas Köner. The excavation of electronic music history takes a more unusual turn on "Up the Box", which plays with a snippet of what sounds like the "Amen" break. But the familiar splash of jungle snares and cymbals is transformed by Stott into something of his own own, as he mixes the tricky rhythms with his now undeniable bass signature, a groaning maw flecked with distortion that feels like it's rattling everything within earshot. Stott has a rare ability to pull sounds from different places and fit them into his album conception.

Two records from the past offer antecedents for Stott's breakthrough: Luomo's Vocalcity and Burial's Untrue. It's not that Luxury Problems sounds like either of these releases-- the mood and textures are vastly different in each case. But there's a spiritual connection between the three, all of which found producers working within the confines of a specific genre of electronic music discovering a way to turn their music inside and out and broaden its appeal through the manipulated voice. But if Vocalcity was a digital refraction of house music and Untrue took early UK dubstep as a jumping-off point to express post-club emptiness and yearning, Luxury Problems is more internally focused, an evocative and immersive soundtrack for a sustained look within. It's the headphones album of the year from a producer with a long history who has come into his own.

Andy Stott must thrive in limbo. For much of the last decade, the Manchester producer shifted restlessly between varied electronic niches. He darted from spartan techno to luxuriating dub and so on, releasing singles with the enthusiasm of a keen listener trying to stake his own artistic identity. In 2011, he claimed that place with unapologetic if muted audacity, issuing two immersive EPs within four months. Passed Me By and We Stay Together flooded his self-made world of gray sounds and surface static with beats that, in retrospect, he seemed to have spent years learning and bending to his will. The deep house thuds of "Cherry Eye", the footwork splendor of "North to South", the slow-motion stutters of "Execution": They all cohabitated within Stott’s new twilit mode.

The addition of Alison Skidmore’s clarion vocals and Stott’s evermore-aggressive rhythms only enhanced the ghostly environment of the masterful 2012 LP, Luxury Problems. Mixing field recordings, vocal takes, and an assortment of technical processes, Stott operated both inside an uncanny valley and within its inverse, making the artificial seem natural and the alien seem familiar. After more than a dozen releases, Stott could now call an approach—a liminal state of the human and inhuman, of the driving and the drifting—his own.

On Faith in Strangers, Stott’s first substantive solo release since Luxury Problems, he applies that kilned aesthetic to an expanding set of sounds and ideas. If that 2011–2012 trilogy found Stott codifying his style, Faith in Strangers is his attempt to stretch it by piggybacking that recent system onto his early adventurousness. It’s a bold move, one made with a new vote of public valediction. Luxury Problems, for instance, began with its most instant hook. Her voice wrapped in a lacework of effects, Skidmore seductively repeated "touch" until Stott’s shuddering beat fell in behind her. But Faith in Strangers starts with something that belongs more on the landmark sound-art label Touch. "Time Away" opens in silence, or at least the room tone of a field recording. A horn slowly intones one note, which decays against a bed of quiet and creepy field recordings. It’s as though Stott’s world breathed in the long-tone pieces of minimalist composer Yoshi Wada and exhaled them through his trademark filter of glitches, pops, and hazes.

Skidmore’s voice arrives for the second track, the stunning "Violence", but it’s reversed and filtered, pieces of her syllables simply cut off at the root. "Clap your hands/ clap your hands," she sings as though to tease an audience about a beat that, nearly nine minutes into the album, has yet to arrive. When at last it does, the pulse is one of the most forceful of Stott’s catalogue, the shuddering bass and snare snaps suggesting that the producer has now welcomed trap into his vocabulary, too. But it’s damaged and distorted in much the same way as all Stott sounds. He pulls new influences into his fold without allowing them to push him outside of his preordained spheres—a nightclub built with pillows and wired with headphones, or a narcotics den affixed with mirror balls and strobe lights.

Faith in Strangers starts soft and light, only to have Stott gradually amplify the energy across its 54 minutes. By the time the record enters its second half, it’s climbed from half-graceful, half-spectral footwork to minimal rhythms rattled by enormous bass and lurid synths. And then, on "No Surrender", an organ run that suggests the house music at Timothy Leary’s Daheim Castle introduces a catastrophic beat. The kick pounds and snares pop through a sheet of static, moving as if they’ve ruptured every speaker system upon initial impact. Stott applies that distortion to the splintered IDM of "How It Was" and, most tellingly, to the remarkable "Damage".

The meat of that aptly named number is an enormous, bass-backed melody, the exact sort of chirping hulk that turned TNGHT into a set of five adrenaline injections. For Stott, though, it’s just another plaything, an element to drag into his mix. He lets the hook blow out until it’s degraded into low fidelity, and he surrounds it on all sides with caustic noise. The harsh cymbal splashes at the start recall a Max Neuhaus experiment with drums, the clipped ending the manic cut-ups of Hrvatski. "Damage" is the shortest and most magnetic song on Faith in Strangers, Stott’s real shot at a legitimate single. But he rejects the notion wholesale, as though boasting that the rubric he’s rendered simply won’t allow something so straight.

In the last three years, Stott has not only cemented his approach but also upped his ambition, moving from a producer who made disjointed singles to a musician hoping to craft albums with unspoken narrative action. "It sounds cliché to say a ‘journey,’ but it’s got to be a story in some sense," he told Tiny Mix Tapes of this LP. "It does intensify from start to finish." At this point, actually pulling that off remains Stott’s main challenge. Despite his increasingly disciplined and unified technique, Faith in Strangers can feel disorganized when taken as a whole. The intended arc from invitation toward aggression occssionally scans more as zigs and zags between a few distinct suites. Still, the separate moments are astounding, evidence of a musician who has managed to remain inquisitive even as he’s established his signature.

Björk's ninth proper full-length, filled with lush arrangements and some of her most powerful singing, can be slotted among the most human, emotionally candid, even functional of art forms: the breakup album.

Björk has logged nearly 30 years of increasing artistic cred and platform-omnivorous ambition, and she has the enviable ability to anticipate sonic and technological waves just before they crest. But her albums over the past decade have underwhelmed, despite their reach and sense of craft. Part of it’s how Björk, as she’s grown as an artist, has grown inward; at her best (parts of Medúlla and Biophilia), her albums come off like slivers of some grand unrealized possibility—undeniably dazzling, but intimidating for everyone who isn’t Björk. At her worst (parts of Volta), those slivers are contorted, Procrustes-style, into the easy templates she left behind somewhere around Debut.

But part of it’s the tendency to make Björk into other, false versions of herself: Björk the wayward pop figure, Björk the wearer of the outfits that became memes, Björk the metaphor-smitten New Ager, Björk as the quirky vessel for her male collaborators, rather than the person with complete creative and curatorial control over all aspects of her music. Even Björk the genius, who works in the abstract, disconnected from, as she once sang, "the exchange of human emotions." But for all her classical ambitions and hyperextended metaphors, the best Björk tracks express startlingly direct emotional truths, blown up to their towering real-life scale.

Nowhere is this more clear than on her ninth album proper, Vulnicura. Co-produced by Arca (Kanye West’s Yeezus, FKA twigs’ LP1, his own Xen) and the Haxan Cloak and drawing on Björk’s split with artist Matthew Barney, the album places itself among the most human, emotionally candid, even functional of art forms: the breakup album. Its position is deliberate; in conversation with Pitchfork, she called Vulnicura a "traditional singer/songwriter thing," suggesting something plainspoken, modest, even folksy. Perhaps unsurprisingly, Vulnicura is none of these things, but it’s simultaneously her most mature feat of arranging and almost psychosomatically affecting. It’s also, as was widely reported, with us a few months early. While it’d be wrong to say it’s for the best that Vulnicura was leaked then rush-released—no one in Björk’s position would welcome that—the leak does her an inadvertent service: it makes Vulnicura the first Björk album in years to come into the world untethered by museum exhibitions, movie tie-ins, iPad apps, or promo cycles involving Timbaland. We receive it simply on its own iconoclastic terms.

Vulnicura is loosely arranged around the chronology of a relationship: the period before the breakup, the dazed moments after, the slow recovery. It’s a sense of time that’s both hyper-specific—in the liner notes, Björk places each song up until the two-thirds mark in an exact point on the timeline, from nine months before to 11 months after—and loose, with half-moments that span entire dramatic arcs. "History of Touches", for example, is a near-forensic exhumation of the precise time of relationship death. The song begins and ends upon the narrator waking her soon-to-be-ex-lover, and Arca’s programming develops in slow motion as Björk’s vocal and lyric circle back upon the scale and warp the timeline: "The history of touches, every single archive compressed into a second." There’s some "Cocoon" in there, in the post-coital setting and smitten sigh, but there’s also the unmistakable sense that everything Björk describes is expiring as she speaks it. It’s luxuriant and bleary and sad, something like sleepwalking infatuated through an autopsy. Skip to several months after in the record's progression, album centerpiece "Black Lake", a masterwork of balancing elements: Björk’s requiem strings leading to Arca’s tectonic-plate percussion and vocal patches, cuttingly crafted (in unmistakably Björk fashion) lines like "I am bored of your apocalyptic obsessions" giving way to lines far more unadorned and unanswerable: "Did I love you too much?"

What keeps these questions from sounding maudlin are those flashes of rueful wit (elsewhere, on "Family": "Is there a place where I can pay respects for the death of my family?") and Björk’s vocal delivery; she’s at least twice expressed her admiration, at the pure musical level, of fado singer Amália Rodrigues, and you can hear it in how she leans into syllables, indulging feelings then dissecting them. Rarely does Vulnicura sound anything but seamless; her palette blends in drum-and-bass loops, flatline effects, groaning cellos, pitch-warped echoes by Antony Hegarty. The more Björk has grown as an arranger, the less dated her albums sound; closer "Quicksand" initially scans like it’s approaching over-timely Rudimental territory, but it’s a little late in the album for that, and this is soon subsumed into a string reverie that’s unmistakably hers.

In Björk’s discography, Vulnicura most resembles Vespertine, another unyieldingly cerebral work about vulnerability and being turned by love to besotted viscera, and also an unmistakably female album. Vulnicura doubles down on these elements, from the choir arrangements to the yonic wound imagery of the cover, like Björk’s attempt at a grand unified photoshoot of female pain, to Vulnicura’s echoes from the first track ("Moments of clarity are so rare—I better document this") of the long tradition of women artists thinking and rethinking their own life stories, in public, until they coalesce into art. Fittingly, when Björk dispenses with the breakup framework (and timestamps) two-thirds of the way through the album, Vulnicura becomes about more. "Mouth Mantra" is part glitchy nightmare of grotesque imagery ("my mouth was sewn up… I was not heard") and part reassertion of her artistic identity: "this tunnel has enabled thousands of sounds."

It isn’t just her. "I want to support young girls who are in their 20s now and tell them you’re not just imagining things," she told Pitchfork, and on "Quicksand" Vulnicura shifts finally from personal documentation of one person’s rough year to words for those who’ve stayed for it all: "Every time you give up, you take away our future and my continuity—and my daughter’s, and her daughters, and her daughters," Björk sings on the track, just before it cuts off mid-string cadenza. It’s possible to hear this as resignation, but it’s also possible to hear it as a note of hope, that there is a future after coming out of such an emotional wringer, if not quite one that’s reassuring. The ambiguity feels honest.

Pablo Picasso and Kanye West share many qualities—impatience with formal schooling, insatiable and complicated sexual appetites, a vampiric fascination with beautiful women as muses—but Pablo Picasso was never called an asshole. Kanye, specifically, toasted them. The Life of Pablo's namesake is a provocation, a mystery, a sly acknowledgement of multitudes: Drug lord Pablo Escobar is a permanent fixture of rap culture, but the mystery of "which one?" set Twitter theorists down fascinating rabbit holes, drawing up convincing stand-ins for Kanye's Blue Period (808s & Heartbreak), his Rose Period (My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy), and his Crystal Period (Yeezus). If Kanye is comparable to Picasso, The Life of Pablo is the moment, after a turbulent life leaving many artistic revolutions and mistreated women in his wake, that the artist finally settles down. In this formulation, Kim Kardashian is Jacqueline Roque, Picasso's final muse and the woman to whom he remained faithful (she even kinda looks like a Kardashian), and the record is the sound of a celebrated megalomaniac settling for his place in history.

The Life of Pablo is, accordingly, the first Kanye West album that's just an album: No major statements, no reinventions, no zeitgeist wheelie-popping. It's probably his first full-length that won't activate a new sleeper cell of 17-year-old would-be rappers and artists. He's changed the genre's DNA with every album, to the point where each has inspired a generation of direct offspring, and now everywhere he looks, he sees mirrors. "See, I invented Kanye, it wasn't any Kanyes, and now I look and look around and there's so many Kanyes," he raps wryly on "I Love Kanye." The message seems clear: He's through creating new Kanyes, at least for now. He's content to just stand among them, both those of his own creation and their various devotees.

Kanye's second child Saint was born in early December, and there's something distinctly preoccupied about this whole project—it feels wry, hurried, mostly good-natured, and somewhat sloppy. Like a lot of new parents, Kanye feels laser-focused on big stuff—love, serenity, forgiveness, karma—and a little frazzled on the details. "Ultralight Beam" opens with the sound of a 4-year-old preaching gospel, some organ, and a church choir: "This is a God dream," goes the refrain. But everything about the album's presentation—the churning tracklist, the broken promises to premiere it here or there, the scribbled guest list—feels like Kanye ran across town to deliver a half-wrapped gift to a group birthday party to which he was 10 minutes late.

Thankfully, he's bringing a Kanye album, and Kanye albums make pretty goddamn good gifts. His devotion to the craft of album-making remains his greatest talent. Albums are his legacy, what he knows, deep down, will endure after the circus of attention he maintains around him subsides. His ability to package hundreds of stray threads into a whole that feels not just thrilling, but *inevitable—*at this, he is better than everyone, and he throws all of his best tricks into The Life of Pablo to remind us. He picks the right guests and gives them idealized settings, making people you don't care about sound fantastic and people you do care about sound immortal. Chance the Rapper, a spiritual heir to backpack-and-a-Benz Kanye if there ever was one, is given the spotlight on the opener "Ultralight Beam," and uses his dazed, happy verse to quote both "Otis" and the bonus track to Late Registration. His joy is palpable, and it's clear he has waited his entire adult life to be featured on a Kanye album. On the other hand, "Fade" pits Future knockoff Post Malone, of all people, against a sample of Chicago house legend Larry Heard's "Mystery of Love" and a flip of Motown blues rock band Rare Earth's "I Know I'm Losing You" and rigs the mix so that Malone, somehow, sounds more important than both of them.

This moment is also a reminder of Kanye's audacious touch with huge, immediately recognizable pieces of musical history—his best work as a producer has always drawn from iconic songs so venerated most sane people wouldn't dare touch them, from "Gold Digger" to "Blood on the Leaves" and beyond. He doesn't just sample these songs, he climbs in and joyrides them like the Maybach in the "Otis" video. On "Famous," he does it twice, first by matching up Nina Simone's "Do What You Gotta Do" with Rihanna, who sings the song's hook before Nina does, and then with Sister Nancy's "Bam Bam," which gets flipped so it sits atop a chorale-like chord progression. It sounds like a dancehall remix of Pachelbel's Canon, and it's the most joyful two minutes of music on the album.

"Waves," a song that made the tracklist at the last second at Chance the Rapper's insistence, has a similar energy. You can hear why Chance, specifically, might've wanted it back: It is a throwback to the Rainbow Road maximalism of "We Major," and it is so warmly redemptive it even makes Chris Brown, who sings the hook, sound momentarily benevolent. "Waves" is hardly the only last-second change made: The Kendrick Lamar collaboration "No More Parties In L.A." is back on here, as is an inexplicable minute-long voicemail from imprisoned rapper Max B, granting Kanye permission to use his popular slang term "wavy." Such last-second fidgets seem to say something about The Life of Pablo itself. After years of agonizing over how to follow up the conceptually triumphant 808s & Heartbreak, My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy, and Yeezus, he seems to have settled upon eternal flux as a resting place, and the album plays like Kanye might still be remixing it furiously in your headphones while you listen.

"Father Stretch My Hands" tosses a sample from Southside Chicago icon, activist, and one-time fraud convict Pastor T.L. Barrett into a gurgling trash compactor alongside some pigeon-cooed backing vocals and an entire undigested verse from another Future knockoff, Brooklyn upstart Desiigner. It's the least-finished-sounding piece of music to ever feature on a Kanye album. This is the logical endpoint to the sort of obsessive perfectionism that led West to make 75 near-identical mix downs of  "Stronger," and in the song's lyrics, Kanye admits that the same workaholism that made his father a distant figure in his childhood now keeps him from his family. On "FML," he name-checks the antidepressant Lexapro on record for the second time in a year, and alludes to something that sounds an awful lot like a manic episode. The life of a creative visionary has dark undercurrents ("name me one genius who ain't crazy," Kanye demands on "Feedback") and it's possible that The Life of Pablo title serves as much private warning as boastful declaration.

The album's most humane moments come when he reaches for his family: "I just want to wake up with you in my eyes," he pleads at the end of "Father Stretch My Hands." On "FML," a bleak song about resisting sexual temptation, he sings to Kim, "They don't want to see me love you." "Real Friends" reprises his "Welcome to Heartbreak" role as the unhappy outsider at his own family events, squirming through reunions and posing for pictures "before it's back to business"; it's maybe the saddest he's ever sounded on record.

Tuning into the humanity in Kanye's music amid bursts of boorish static can be difficult, and the most prominent example of assholery on Pablo comes from the instantly infamous jab "I feel like me and Taylor might still have sex," which feels like a piece of bathroom graffiti made to purposefully reignite the most racially-charged rivalry in 21st-century pop. But there's lots more where that came from, sneaking in behind the headline: "If I fuck this model/ And she just bleached her asshole/ And I get bleach on my T-shirt/ I'mma feel like an asshole" is maybe the most unforgivably stupid thing Kanye West has ever rapped. And on the bonus track "30 Hours," he takes a moment to sneer, "My ex said she gave me the best years of her life/ I saw a recent picture of her, I guess she was right."

At moments like this, you sense the airlessness of super-celebrity closing in around him. Even when he was being loathsome, Kanye's behavior always felt rooted in something messy and relatable. During the wild scrum of The Life of Pablo's press cycle—when he tweeted "I own your child!!" at Wiz Khalifa in response to a minor misunderstanding, or his "BILL COSBY INNOCENT !!!!!!!!!!" tweet, for instance—there was a prevailing sense that Kanye had entered such a consequence-free zone that we can never truly relate to him anymore. Once upon a time, he was The Asshole Incarnate, the self-described "douchebag" that we couldn't look away from. But there are moments here where he just sounds like another asshole.

And yet, as it always does in Kanye's essentially crowd-pleasing, deeply Christian music, the light wins out over the darkness. A madcap sense of humor animates all his best work, and The Life of Pablo has a freewheeling energy that is infectious and unique to his discography. Somehow, it comes off as both his most labored-over and unfinished album, full of asterisks and corrections and footnotes. "It was my idea to have an open relationship, now a nigga mad," he jokes on "30 Hours," sending up his own masculine fragility. "I need every bad bitch up in Equinox/ I need to know right now if you a freak or not," he jokes on "Highlights."

And with The Life of Pablo, this humor isn't just in the verses, it's in the rollout, too. Somewhere between the record's several title changes, it started to feel like Kanye had decided to turn his troubled-blockbuster-syndrome into performance art. "We still don't have a title," Kim Kardashian tweeted, days before the announced rollout. The day after he rented out Madison Square Garden so he could plug in his laptop, it was suddenly unclear, again, if the album was coming out at all; the mess was so profound that a tweet noting "Young Thug claimed on Periscope it was coming out on SNL tomorrow" suddenly seemed like solid intel. Chaos reigned, and as the twists and turns mounted, it was hard to keep from laughing helplessly.

Around this point, the joke became clear: This whole thing—album cycles, first-week sales, release dates, the album-as-statement, the album itself—is ridiculous. The only other recent marquee star to allow something this messy to bear their name was Rihanna, whose ANTI was released into the world last month in a similarly slipshod manner. Both stars are jewels in the late-period Roc-A-Fella dynasty, their careers forged in the dying embers of the old-school music industry where promotional campaigns were telegraphed months in advance, where singles and video rollouts were executed with airstrike precision, where release dates loomed like skyscrapers. In the ensuing industry freefall, Kanye and Rihanna have weathered every absurdity imaginable—platinum plaques handed out by Samsung, biometric suitcases carrying leakproof records, artist-owned streaming services that put up their records for a few minutes by accident. Watching the sea of confusion and despair on news feeds and timelines, you can almost hear them chuckling: None of this matters, because none of it is real.

If there was a larger message behind all this impulsive last-second lurching and heaving, that was it. "We on an ultralight beam/ This is a God dream" reads like an affirmation that we live in a world touched by divinity—but it could also mean the universe is a trick of the light, and we're nothing but a figment in a higher being's imagination. Nothing is as it seems, nothing is safe from revision, and nothing lasts: In one last rug pull, Kanye claimed that the "Pablo" of the title was neither Escobar nor Picasso, but St. Paul of Tarsus ("Pablo" in Spanish). The claim slots neatly with his assertion that The Life of Pablo is a "gospel album," and on "Wolves,"  he offers a resonant, lonely image: Kim and Kanye as Mary and Joseph, alone in the manger and surrounded by the void.  "Cover Nori in lamb's wool/ We surrounded by/ The fuckin wolves," he raps. If Pablo is indeed St. Paul, Kanye might have a passage on his mind from Corinthians, Chapter 13 verse 2: "If I have a faith that can move mountains, but do not have love, I am nothing."

As an artist, Young Thug thrives in between spaces. His chic, fresh-off-the-runway looks flirt with androgyny. Entire sequences of his raps unspool as nonsequiturs forcing listeners to extract meaning from bars of source code. Even the assorted ad-libs in his songs maximize the slightest pocket of air, exploding and retracting back through crevices in his unpredictable flows. He is constantly balancing opposing forces: masculine and feminine, light and dark, playful and humorless, pirouetting on a razor’s edge at all times. Modeling alongside Frank Ocean for Calvin Klein in July, he was as plainspoken about fluidity as he’s ever been. “In my world, of course, it don’t matter: You could be a gangster with a dress or you could be a gangster with baggy pants,” he said in his campaign video. “I feel like there’s no such thing as gender.” It’s this freedom, this refusal to define or label himself, and this progressive spirit that makes everything he does so daring and so mystifying. When industry mogul Lyor Cohen argued with Thug about being more accessible to listeners and more purposeful in thought and action on CNBC’s “Follow the Leader,” his response was simple: “I don’t want everybody just to know, like, ‘Oh, we know.’” The remove is everything to him. When he says or does something, he’s usually daring you to figure out why.

Existing on incomprehensible terms has made Thug recherché to the casual rap fan, which is why his debut album turned retail mixtape, Barter 6, remains his greatest pivot of all. It’s cohesive, understated, and about as accessible as Thug gets, an ingenious turn from oddball rap archetype to intuitive master craftsman. Every release after it lives in its shadow: aimless hard drive dumps attempting to combat a massive data breach that leaked hundreds of Thug songs online last May.

In the months since he eulogized his Slime Season trilogy (“All good things must come to an end, this is the birth of something new”), Thug teased snippets of new songs with captions that just read “JEFFERY.” Not long after, Cohen announced an official name change: No, My Name is Jeffery. A trailer for the mixtape found Thug in an interrogation room explaining to cops who he was. He wasn’t a young thug anymore. “I feel like I had a long-term relationship with Young Thug, and I’m kind of picky, so I felt like I didn’t want to be in front of a Bill Gates or Oprah Winfrey,” he explained at the Jeffery listening party. “I didn’t want my kids to grow up and call me Thug because in real-life terms Thug is thug.” It’s impossible not to interpret that as some sort of response to the current racial climate, where the word “thug” is used as a racist dog whistle; it’s his most obvious statement in ages. Jeffery is the first Young Thug release that considers identity. But the rapper is rarely ever literal in verse; he always opts to show, not tell.

Though just as carefully sequenced and well-executed, Jeffery isn’t as tranquil, distant, or harmonious as Barter 6, which had cleansing, almost spiritual properties. Young Thug doesn’t often attempt the same thing twice, but this is perhaps his most chameleonic outing to date. The songs here are all named for his “idols”: Kanye West, former Fugee Wyclef Jean, pound-for-pound boxing king Floyd Mayweather, producer Swizz Beatz, Future, Rihanna, Gucci Mane, Webbie (of “Independent” fame), and Harambe. A careless listener might mistake them for actual song subjects. But these are all just misdirections. Outside of revealing small context clues about his origins as a stylist, and sometimes hinting at his mode or setting (like on “Future Swag”), this isn’t actually about any of those people. “Jeffery is all about Jeffery,” he explained at the listening party. “It ain’t even about Young Thug. Ain’t no Young Thug songs on there.” These are Jeffery songs, and from the sound of things, Jeffery’s greatest influence is his fiancé, Jerrika.

The songs on Jeffery are brimming with romantic subtext—Skyping a lover while she’s overseas, doing things together (“bae drink your lean with me, bae fall asleep with me”), and simply being head over heels for her (“she know she got a nigga bad”). In the opening verse of “Guwop,” he digs everything she says, everything she does, and even the way she looks at him. At one point on “Harambe,” he straight up belts out, “I just want to have a baby by you, girl!” The mixtape swoons and swells, heart fluttering, as Thug waxes poetic about his baby. This is the primary thread woven through the tape, which isn’t so much a love story as a sex tape with loving inscriptions.

Romance is at Jeffery’s core, but it’s driven by dynamic vocal performances others wouldn’t dare attempt—the pleading, bloodhound-ish yowl on “RiRi,” the breathless sprinter’s wheeze on “Harambe,” which explodes into a full-bodied Louis Armstrong impression, and the slinky yips on “Swizz Beatz.” The raps are delivered as mutters, shouts, and gasps, and flows are administered decisively and effectively. His wordplay is nimble and sharp, often using clever associations to create vivid imagery (“I picked my diamonds out a honey tree,” on “RiRi”; “I just got a family pack of Jimmy Choos” and “I got six brand new foreigns on my wrist/I got six Forgiatos on my fist,” on “Floyd Mayweather”). He has longstanding working relationships with every guest but one, and that repetition-built muscle memory shows in the results. He effortlessly passes the baton back and forth with Gunna and mentor Gucci Mane on “Floyd Mayweather,” picking up wherever the last trailed off. Duke, a standout guest on the Barter 6 cut “Dome,” smartly follows Thug’s lead on “Webbie.” The sole newcomer, Wyclef Jean, soothingly coos “Jeffery” over Thug’s shoulder on “Kanye West,” and it’s the optimal complement. There isn’t a word or note out of place.

Despite his growing reputation as a flamboyant eccentric who lives outside the boundaries of traditional songcraft making quirky “post-verbal” rap defying convention, Thug understands the modern pop song construction better than anyone: anything and everything can be a hook. Finding hooks keeps the mind stimulated and euphoric, creating something John Seabrook calls the “bliss point” in his book, The Song Machine: Inside the Hit Factory. What separates Young Thug songs at their peak from other pop confections is how seamlessly the transitions occur, where they materialize, and what he’s using them to do. He doesn’t want to numb the brain; He wants to super-charge its synapses. Changes happen every few bars, they turn sharply, and they make big dramatic gestures. Take “Future Swag,” which uses repetition, rapidly alternating rhythms, and ad-libs to remain constantly mobile, shifting and morphing six times in the first minute. Or “Swizz Beatz,” where he creates his own echo, repeating phrases within verses (“with me, with me”; “‘bout it, ‘bout it”; “turn up for the”) and within the chorus itself (“love”) while creating alternate hooks with melody. Micro-hooks are hidden inside of hooks and it’s all brain candy.

For nearly 42 minutes, Jeffery explores spacing, lines, form, texture, and beauty—all of which are exhibited in the mixtape’s mesmerizing artwork. The Atlanta rapper seemed to breathe life into the ideas first articulated at the Calvin Klein shoot with the cover, posed in a ruffling dress styled by Alessandro Trincone. While some people’s brains shut down at simply the sight of a man in a dress, the cover exhibits some of Thug’s strongest artistic traits: His eye for composition and stylishness, and his knack for testing limits and hurdling norms. Jeffery embodies these attributes in essence and detail. It’s rangy and stunning, an exciting new curve in the fascinating Young Thug arc.

Danny Brown is an auteur. Hip-hop has a tradition of collaboration, but the Detroit rapper is a one-man show who, while he reps his own Bruiser Brigade and works frequently with a handful of producers, has a voice and vision completely his own. You can think of his progression over the last five years in filmic terms. If 2011’s XXX was the brilliant independent foreign film that was critically acclaimed and wildly successful and put him on the map, Old was the solid but safer domestic version, with higher production costs, a prettier cast, and many of the edges sanded off. Atrocity Exhibition, then, is the movie someone makes after they come back down to earth from making that tentpole project, a work predicated on the “one for me, one for them” mentality.

Brown’s individual releases need to be understood as part of a whole, and in each of them, he has an obsession with form. On Old, he took a throwaway line about getting jumped on the way to the grocery store to buy Wonder Bread from XXX and built a whole song around the incident, and he snakes references to his older work throughout Atrocity Exhibition. Take the title of the first song, “Downward Spiral.” It’s a direct nod to XXX’s opening track, where Brown prominently (and memorably) rapped: “it’s the downward spiral, got me suicidal/But too scared to do it.” By reaching back five years, Brown makes Atrocity Exhibition a brick in a larger edifice, perhaps a bookend to an implied trilogy that starts with XXX and ends here.

Structurally, Atrocity Exhibition finds Brown doubling down on familiar tropes from his last two records: once again he starts with a gripping opener, the mise-en-scène; following that are some shorter songs in rapid succession that do the dirty work of exposition; a back-half run that reckons with the hedonism that comes before it (that section here starts with the Kelela-anointed “From the Ground”); and then, finally, a stomach-churning closing track that is never triumphantly resolute but feels like an ending just the same.

But the references extend well beyond Brown’s own work, and well beyond hip-hop. “Downward Spiral” is of course an oblique Nine Inch Nails nod, and Brown, who sampled This Heat and Hawkwind on the same song on XXX, drags Atrocity Exhibition through an industrial, electronic, post-punk sludge, borrowing a title from Joy Division while releasing the album on Warp. The bass on “Rolling Stone,” a duet with South African singer Petite Noir, is pure New Order. “Ain’t It Funny,” with its bold horns, recalls the Stooges’ flirtations with free jazz and Bauhaus at their most bombastic.

The thirty-five-year-old Brown has an old-head mentality as a rapper: play a song and he’ll rap on it. Make any beat and he’ll rap on it. It’s about rhymes, wordplay, and (for lack of a better term), bars. This approach isn’t currently fashionable, but there’s a pleasure in hearing someone else’s joy at putting words together—Brown’s old-school bent intermittently hits some delirious highs, from “Slice your tomato if you owe us for the lettuce/Running through the sack of D sorta like Jerome Bettis,” to “Rocks about the size as the teeth in Chris Rock’s mouth.”

The potential pitfall to this word-drunk approach is sometimes his songs just aren’t easy on the ears. The production here sounds wonderful—frequent collaborator Paul White is credited with 10 songs, and the two have an easy chemistry, because both indulge in coloring outside traditional genre lines (White’s collaborative album with Open Mike Eagle from earlier this year, Hella Personal Film Festival, is kind of like the quieter, gentler, non-evil version of this album, pulling from a different set of rock influences). But Brown sometimes lapses into his Old flows, that idiosyncratic style where he falls off beat, gets in front of it, or simply yells above it. He avoids the frat-baiting EDM songs like “Dip” and “Smokin & Drinkin” that pocked Old here, even though singles like “When It Rain” (more vintage Brown than anything from the past five years) and “Pneumonia” flirt with that sound. But fortunately they’re too rough around the edges, too jumpy, too dark to soundtrack a scene like this. To its credit, Atrocity Exhibition balances its sonic elements and never slips into the mush of guitars and bad ideas that threatened to infiltrate rap at the dawn of this century. White, Brown’s most gifted and consistent collaborator, keeps things at an even keel.

No matter what's going on with the music, Brown’s acute emotional writing is once again on full display. Where XXX seemed to promise a way out, Old reflected (and sometimes reveled in) the lifestyle afforded him through his breakout success. This record, as dark, dingy, and uncomfortable as it is, continues to suggest something deeper is haunting Brown. “Everybody say, you got a lot to be proud of/Been high this whole time, don’t realize what I done/‘Cause when I’m all alone, feels like no one care/Isolate myself and don’t go nowhere,” he offers. He so internalizes all of his demons that, for the third record in this implied trilogy, you start to worry—is he irredeemably lost? Is his pain a response to his upbringing in Detroit, ground zero for armchair sociologists looking for a symbol of American decay? How long before the dam finally breaks? The great “Lost” here brings all these concerns to a head.

And then there’s “Really Doe,” produced by Detroit compatriot Black Milk, which juts out on the geography of the album because it features guest rappers (B-Real merely shows up for the hook on “Get Hi”) and also because it’s the only song not directly about Brown’s demons. It’s a fun track, and Earl Sweatshirt does that thing where he acts like he’s not rapping but ends up murdering everyone anyway while expending as little energy as possible. “I was a liar as a kid, so now I’m honest as fuck,” Earl offers, his unwavering delivery always imbuing what he raps with a startling amount of intimacy. You sometimes wish Brown could hit these more casually real notes more frequently, like he did on the origin story “EWNESW” from XXX or the blackout bars of “Greatest Rapper Ever” and “White Stripes” from 2010’s The Hybrid. But Brown is too good a writer and too focused on the whole not to carry heavy feelings into all his songs, like “some people say I think too much/I don’t think they think enough,” from “Rolling Stone,” and “your work killing fiends/‘cause you cut it with Fentanyl,” from “Ain’t It Funny.”  These reflective lines are the work of a smart writer with an eye for hard-earned detail, and Atrocity Exhibition finds Brown back behind the lens, capturing raw emotion with grainy 16mm.

So far, Spencer Doran’s mixtapes have overshadowed his actual albums. In 2010, the Portland, Oregon, producer posted Fairlights, Mallets and Bamboo—Fourth-World Japan, Years 1980–1986, a stunning collection of early-’80s Japanese synthesizer music by artists like Yellow Magic Orchestra’s Haruomi Hosono and Ryuichi Sakamoto. While not a party-starting DJ set, it was in its own meticulous, contemplative way, influential; you can hear its sensibility course through later works by the likes of Oneohtrix Point Never, Neon Indian, Motion Graphics, and the entire vaporwave contingency. A second volume followed, as did another series, Music Interiors, cementing Doran’s status as an innovative curator of now-obscure sounds.

But despite the bubbling ambience and generally high quality of Doran and partner Ryan Carlile’s 2015 debut album as Visible Cloaks, the initial full-length was overshadowed by the earlier mixes. On their second album, Reassemblage, however, the duo fully absorb these far-flung influences, weaving the strands into something delicate yet decidedly original. Lullaby-like though compositionally rigorous, serene but slightly unsettled, organic and synthetic, Reassemblage strikes an intriguing balance between extremes.

Like Daniel Lopatin, James Ferraro, and Laurel Halo did during the short reign of Hippos in Tanks at the start of the decade, Visible Cloaks scrutinize the once-novel digital sounds that now riddle modern pop and envelop us in our everyday lives. Just don’t call Visible Cloaks “vaporwave”—if anything, Reassemblage is the antithesis of that trend. While on the surface there is a shared obsession with the cleanliness of early digital music and the Japanese pop culture that helped usher it in the early ‘80s, what Doran and Carlile do with the raw material stands apart.

Scroll through the Discogs page for vaporwave and almost any title bears either a visual wink or track title that mimics Japanese script. As an Esquire piece proclaiming that vaporwave was dead posited last year, the genre itself was a “musical parody of pop consciousness… [a] sarcastic take on the unachieved utopias of previous decades.” But as Fairlights, Mallets, and Bamboo showed, there was a deeper investigation into the music beyond a mocking appropriation of a cool surface. The title itself comes from Vietnamese filmmaker/theorist Trinh T. Minh-ha's 1982 film Reassemblage, a documentary filmed in Senegal that doubles as a tacit admission that one can never fully decipher another culture. While never able to fully grasp the Japanese sounds they adore, Visible Cloaks nevertheless have created an album along the axis of Fennesz’s Endless Summer and OPN’s Replica, an abstract electronic album that’s readily accessible and an immersive listen.

Visible Cloaks specialize in blurring boundaries, as they collapse organic sounds into precisely machined new shapes. “Mask” works from a palette closest to those Root Strata mixes, as gamelan bowls, bird calls, and vocodered hums are stretched and processed like a Fennesz track. “Terrazzo” has Doran and Carlile team up with Motion Graphics’ Joe Williams, taking his flute and elongating it until it more closely resembles a shakuhachi bamboo version. Around this timbre, the duo stir a marsh of small blips, twinkling crystals, and koto strings, a strange sensation of natural ambience and glitching electronics blending into an alien landscape.

Even when working with thoroughly synthetic tones, Cloaks tease them out so that they clench and exhale, emerging as digital blips that seem as natural as breath. Water sounds gush out of “Screen,” but rather than replicate new age nature sounds, the frequencies become high and crinkled, like the baldly fake cellophane sea of Frederico Fellini’s And the Ship Sails On. “Valve” continues with that gentle pacing, this time featuring the crystalline vocals of Miyako Koda, one-half of Japanese elegant ’80s group Dip in the Pool. Curiously, the group didn’t factor into any of Doran’s mixes, but “Valve” sounds like a lost Bamboo selection with its deliberate mallets and misty chords. Koda is the perfect fit here and the duo shadows her already gossamer voice with what might be puffs of steam on glass rods.

Water, glass, cellophane, crystals, glass—these metaphors suggest sound that can at once seem transparent and featureless. But Visible Cloaks take pains to pivot their compositions every so often, so that light catches off the sleek edges and a full spectrum of color suddenly appears. And as the album glides along, Cloaks moves away from the easy Hosono and Sakamoto comparisons. “Circle”—with its slivers of voices, strings, and woodwinds—sounds exacting in its every gesture, bringing to mind modern composition rather than laptop mincing. “Neume”—named for an early form of musical notation—finds the Cloaks collaborating with fellow Portlander Matt Carlson. They Auto-Tune his voice, but also warp it until he starts to resemble the polyphonic chants of a medieval organum. It’s one of Reassemblage’s loveliest moments and reveals Visible Cloaks’ essential appeal, not where East meets West so much as where ancient music anticipates its digital future.

No subject has been more badly exploited by art than death. How often have you found yourself in the middle of a good book or movie, warming up to its world, making the magical passage through which its characters’ lives become temporarily real only to be sped into artificial reverence by someone dying? Gosh, you think: Death: That’s big. This must be a pretty meaningful experience. Death is reduced to a sympathy-extraction device, what the New York Times critic Michiko Kakutani once described as “literary ambulance-chasing,” designed to crowbar into the hearts of an audience just as they were thinking about changing the channel. Real death, meanwhile, moves ominously through the world of the living like a tide, gathering in waves that break without warning or reason, paroxysms of grief followed by yet more shapeless life. Fake death pops. Real death remains a slog.

Onto this tightrope walks Phil Elverum, a hermetically introspective songwriter who records under the name Mount Eerie. In spring of 2015, Elverum’s wife Geneviève was diagnosed with pancreatic cancer, a disease that kills 80% of patients within a year. According to the American Cancer Society, nearly all people with pancreatic cancer are over 45; two-thirds are over 65. Geneviève died three months after her 35th birthday. A year and a half earlier, she had given birth to her and Elverum’s first child, a girl.

A Crow Looked at Me, Elverum’s ninth album as Mount Eerie—and 13th overall, counting his earlier music as the Microphones—mentions Geneviève in nearly every song, sometimes by name, sometimes through cold, negative space. It’s almost as though Elverum has nothing better to talk about. Which, of course, he probably doesn’t.

Elverum’s recent albums—2015’s Sauna, 2012’s double feature of Clear Moon and Ocean Roar—were heavy on ambiance and fuzz, sonic embodiments of things through which we can’t see. Crow is spare and clean, mostly voice and some guitar, the sound of coffee in winter. You can almost hear the floorboards creaking. In a recent interview, Elverum called it “barely music.” Given the floss-thin line between his art and experience, you could take it as the album’s intended genre: Barely music.

Over the past few years, there have been a handful of albums similar to Crow, or at least with a similarly autobiographical premise: Sun Kil Moon’s Benji, Sufjan Stevens’ Carrie & Lowell, Nick Cave’s Skeleton Tree, stark, diaristic albums haunted by literal death, grief on record. Indie culture tends to prize this kind of undecorated directness as a stand-in for truth, as though nobody has ever spoken clearly and lied.

But listening to Crow, the songwriter I kept thinking of was Chan Marshall, whose early music as Cat Power felt confessional but surreal, painfully direct but impossible to pin down. Like Marshall, Elverum’s sleight of hand is that standing naked doesn’t make him any easier to see. If anything, Crow’s cold spaces and plainspoken delivery lull the listener into an illusion of solid ground even when it’s not there, laying everything on the same emotional bandwidth, from meditations on geese and forest fires to descriptions of his wife’s jaundiced skin. He never tells you how to feel, or more surprisingly, when.

Elverum’s early albums as the Microphones captured the solipsism of one’s 20s, where even small feelings are uncontainable, not the internal flicker of neurons but plate tectonics, the saga of raging rivers and moons and stars. Here, one’s inner world was always swallowing the outer one, not just a life among many but an allegory of heaven and earth. That the music was so obsessively layered, so obviously the product of a single mind only cemented the underlying metaphor: Elverum wasn’t just the center of his universe, he was its creator.

Real life—its unpunctuated hum, its customer-service lines—has a way of knocking that out of you. Over the past several years, Elverum’s point of view has become earthbound to the point of mundanity. Sauna, from 2015, featured an entire song about walking to the bookstore and seeing a pumpkin. Refreshingly, the pumpkin was not presented as a metaphor for anything; it was a pumpkin. Or, if it was a metaphor, it was only for the accumulation of stuff with no particular meaning or attachment to narrative, for that rare, seamless mindset where things are what they are. Crow’s sharpest line is in its third act: “Conceptual emptiness was cool to talk about, back before I knew my way around these hospitals.”

Most of the time, though, Elverum’s ground isn’t so solid. Crow isn’t so much about sickness or death but the hallucinatory stupor of grief, a state where everything—toothbrushes, flies, crows, and sunsets—flickers with suggestion and memory, as though Geneviève’s spirit had been scattered back into the universe like seeds. One understands Elverum’s temptation intuitively: After all, he can still hold her toothbrush.

So simple, so tactile, so deceptively real are these songs. Their cumulative effect is that they become wobbly with metaphor, forcing the listener into the kind of magical thinking that transforms everything in the living world into a sign of the dead, only to snap back into a reality that for better and worse means nothing. Halfway through the album, Elverum’s daughter asks if mama swims, to which Elverum replies that yes, she swims all the time now, because they scattered her ashes over water.

The album’s most breathtaking line is its last. “Sweet kid, I heard you murmur in your sleep. ‘Crow,’ you said. ‘Crow.’ And I asked, ‘Are you dreaming about a crow?’ And there she was.” In a single moment, the mechanics of these songs—the way dreams refract life, the way grief resurrects the dead without logic or warning—becomes blindingly clear. Then, either because Elverum is polite, or because he’s tired, or because there is nothing more to say, he ends with the image of his wife lingering like something glimpsed through a rainy window, blurry, then gone.

It would be easy to hear this album as sad. Certainly the facts of Elverum's story are. But facts aren’t art and art isn’t real, at least not the way cancer is. For an album so firmly anchored by death, Crow is suffused with life: The geese, the forest fires, the crows, the grocery-store lines where Elverum stumbles through awkward conversation with people from town. Tragedy hasn't stopped him from noticing the world; if anything, it seems to have pried his eyes open for good. As for the question of sadness, I defer to a quote attributed to Anton Chekhov that art should “prepare us for tenderness.” I have two very young children of my own; one of them is sleeping on my chest while I write. Listening to Crow, I find myself imagining what life would be like if I had to raise them without their mother. Think along these lines for any longer than a few seconds and you, like I, may find yourself rebounding from sorrow to a state of almost infinite gratitude. Take a good look, Elverum says: Most of this is beautiful and none of it is guaranteed.

No one throws a party like Power Trip. In the years since their 2008 inception, the Dallas crossover quintet has come to embody the platonic ideal of heavy metal escapism, in person and on record. Genre boundaries get blown to smithereens during their rambunctious, pretension-free concerts; they’ll play with anyone who’s willing to get noisy, be it New Orleans bounce queen Big Freedia, moody post-punk outfit Merchandise, or black metal darlings Deafheaven. Power Trip’s excellent debut album, 2013’s Manifest Decimation, further solidified this reputation by translating their live ferocity to wax. One album on, nine years in, Power Trip have mastered the rager. They now turn their focus to widespread revelry with Nightmare *Logic—*a mission that goes off with a big, beautiful bang.

*Nightmare Logic *doesn’t find Power Trip making any significant shifts to the no-holds-barred approach they showcased so powerfully on their debut. It’s an LP crafted in its predecessor’s literal spitting image, from the proliferative gang vocals and thrash beatdowns right down to the eight-track runtime and gory old-school artwork. Frontman Riley Gale still huffs, puffs, and howls like a rabid wolf, a feral intermediary through which the band issues blistering, occasionally loony indictments of corrupt politicians (“Ruination”) and greedy, polluting CEOs (“If Not Us Then Who”). Gale’s bandmates match these screeds with litanies of their own: particularly guitarist Blake Ibanez, a hardcore titan (and occasional shoegazer) whose slithering riffs incessantly run amok. Even the audience can’t escape Power Trip’s leaden censure. On “Waiting Around to Die,” Gale delivers this sputtering, incendiary pep talk with a rage so palpable you can almost feel it shaking you by the shoulders: “You’re waiting around to die, how can you live with it?/Just waiting around to die, AND I CAN’T FUCKING STAND IT!!!”

Thrash has always been a goofy genre with a morbid sense of humor: a direct consequence of the genre’s primordial days in the Reagan era, when trolling the silent majority doubled as a pre-eminent past-time and a form of protest. Like their peers Iron Reagan and Skeletonwitch, Power Trip view the impending apocalypse as a cause for celebration, powered by schadenfreude. Evangelical Christians are treated to particularly hilarious roastings. “Executioner’s Tax (Swing of the Axe),” the album’s best song, sees Gale calling the bluff of all those Bible-Belters who’d so passionately pleaded for the arrival of the man upstairs, only to come face-to-face with the titular killer-for-hire when the End of Days finally arrives. “You’ve prayed for so long, and now you have your chance/The executioner’s here, and he’s sharpening his axe!”

Power Trip’s new attention to detail pushes Nightmare Logic over the edge. It’s abundantly clear that they’ve spent hours at the dissection table with Manifest Decimation, amplifying—but not recycling—its best hooks and theatrics, trimming off the static scar tissue. They’ve chopped a few seconds of extraneous riffing here, a repeated breakdown there; it’s an impressive operation, considering their debut was plenty lean and mean. The nit-picking pays off, as Nightmare Logic outmatches the preceding LP across all verticals, from cohesion and catchiness to impact and atmosphere.

The band’s secret weapon remains producer and Sumerlands guitarist Arthur Rizk, or as I like to call him, the Ariel Rechtshaid of heavy music; Code Orange’s *Forever and Prurient’s Frozen Niagara Falls *are just two of the bevy of ambitious records he’s worked on. A master of dynamic contrast and sonic feints, Rizk’s the textbook definition of a board-wizard. Under his command, Ibanez’s already-huge tremolo riffs on “Executioner’s Tax”, “Firing Squad,” and the title track become hulking, like a stampede of hellish racehorses against the thundering backbeat. Meanwhile, in the back of the mix, the rhythm section ebbs and flows to accommodate the axework, ensuring sustained impact and easy passage from one ripper to the next. Rizk again runs Gale’s yelps through a heap of effects, rendering every syllable an echo-laden boom from on high. And in spite of its sheer heft, Rizk makes Nightmare Logic a crisp, nuanced listen; like the band themselves, he strikes a rare balance between modern intricacy and old-school aggression, nodding to tradition without over-relying on tropes.

You don’t need to be a metalhead to have a blast with Nightmare Logic. Screamed sardonics, persistent chug, and apocalyptic melodrama are all acquired tastes, sure. But Power Trip’s fist-pumping choruses, ricocheting grooves, and ample charm are so animated that they leave us with something addictive and, well, fun. Just like Metallica, the Texans pitch a big tent, where the only prerequisite for entry is a willingness to splash around in the bloodbath for half an hour. With Nightmare Logic, there’s a good chance you’ll stick around for a good, long soak.

This album began long before Alejandro Ghersi became Arca. In the nascent stages of his career, Ghersi made dreamy synth pop songs as a teenager in Venezuela under the name Nuuro. These love sketches, sung in Spanish and English, showcased an upbeat singing voice and brightly colored electronic landscapes redolent of Postal Service or Passion Pit. What he did as Nuuro and what he now does as Arca couldn’t seem any more different. Arca’s sound is one of chaos and contortions, further defined by the unsettling visuals of morphing bodies suspended in space he made with longtime collaborator Jesse Kanda. But when Ghersi debuted his newfound (or perhaps rediscovered) singing voice on Arca, it felt like a wormhole opened up—one that connected his prehistoric past to his visions of the distant future.

“Piel,” the first song Arca released from this album, felt shockingly new. He hums at first, intimating the cadence of a bedtime lullaby, easing a listener into the song. Then, seconds later, he sings towards the heavens, and acidic drips of distortion, bass, and chorus rumble in the background. The melody feels worn and romantic, and his voice slinks along to the beat like an old prayer. Finally, the music dissolves into a puddle of oozing beats and jumbled clanks. When you listen to “Piel,” there is no question you’re hearing an Arca song. And when you go searching for the answer to why that is, you keep digging into Ghersi’s timeline, trying to figure out how he could make something that feels so ancient and so otherworldly.

The 13-songs on Arca don’t represent an about-face for Ghersi, or even a reinvention. Rather, it imagines what would happen if he intermingled the music of his past (the pop songs he made, the Schumann and Mendelssohn he studied) with the radical noise and boundary-shattering pop he’s invented as Arca. Booming organs, mournful pianos, and classical instrumentation share space with a kaleidoscope of outré production. This juxtaposition is made even more clear by his voice, which proudly wears all of its imperfections: every cough, wheeze, and difficult breath is captured. That he’s using his voice at all is, for Ghersi, an act of time-travelling in itself. He says that his relationship with his voice on this album felt like “communing with [his] teenage self again.” He combines paradoxes and contradictions to create an experience that doesn’t feel like it’s part of our space-time continuum, but a separate universe he’s making on the fly.

The discoveries Ghersi makes on Arca allow him to write his most relaxed and intimate songs. His work is still mysterious, but not as opaque—it doesn’t keep you at an arm’s length, instead he offers up his pleasures more readily. Take for example the three-song sequence of “Coraje,” “Whip,” and “Desafío.” “Coraje,” is the album’s simplest song—Ghersi’s take on the piano ballad. The keys plink away as Ghersi searches for notes high and low. He even sounds like he’s crying at one point—moaning and whispering—his delivery becoming more watery as he reaches the finale. Seconds later, on “Whip,” he rips you from this emotional moment with a minute-and-a-half long track that’s mostly just the sound of a bullwhip rapidly moving back and forth. Then, on “Desafío,” he channels all the pop music he’s written for Kanye, FKA twigs, Björk, Kelela, and others into a single point. It’s warm, impossibly catchy, but densely detailed. It begins with the sound of an air raid siren, but then it cracks open, and Arca unleashes this joyous synth melody and airy drums. He sounds at ease, dancing between notes as he talks about the touch of lover feeling like the kiss of death (“Tócame de primera vez/Mátame una y otra vez”—“Touch me first time/Kill me again and again”). It’s as close to a straightforward pop song Ghersi might write under the name Arca, and it’s outstanding.

Throughout Arca, Ghersi strings together moments like these, finding beauty in contrast. And it’s not just because there is something dazzling about how different each moment feels from one to the next. There’s something legible, more direct about all of this. Hearing him castigate a lover on “Fugaces” (“¿Por qué me mentiste?”—“Why did you lie to me?”) or just saying something as simple as “I miss you” on “Anoche,” is something Ghersi hasn’t done before. Some of these songs sound like they were delivered as if he was right there in the room with you. Even if he claims many of the lyrics were improvised, there is still a strong intention—he’s reaching out and offering his hand. This close-quarters proximity gives these songs a pulse, a warm human heartbeat that seemed buried in all the noise of his older songs.

Ghersi recently revealed that he chose the name Arca because it was an old Spanish word for a “ceremonial container.” Arcas are “empty spaces” that can be filled with meaning. He has never been one to believe in anything as concrete as identity or category, but there is a sense on Arca that he’s looking back at what he’s done in order to reach something else altogether—he’s filling up his box with all the best possible versions of himself: past, present, and future. It’s all for the sake of imagining a world better than the here and now.

Life is one funny motherfucker, it’s true. “DUCKWORTH.,” the last song on Kendrick Lamar's fourth studio album DAMN., tells a winding story about Anthony from Compton and Ducky from Chicago, whose paths cross first over KFC biscuits, and again, 20 years later, when Ducky’s son records a song about the encounter for Anthony’s record label. It’s a precious origin story, the stuff of rock docs and hood DVDs, and it’s delivered with such precision, vivid detail, and masterful pacing that it can’t possibly be true. But it’s a tale too strange to be fiction, and too powerful not to believe in—just like its author. Kendrick Lamar has proven he’s a master storyteller, but he’s been saving his best plot twist this whole time, waiting until he was ready, or able, to pull it off.

Storytelling has been Lamar’s greatest skill and most primary mission, to put into (lots of) words what it's like to grow up as he did—to articulate, in human terms, the intimate specifics of daily self-defense from your surroundings. Somehow, he’s gotten better. The raps on his fourth studio album DAMN. jab mercilessly like a sewing machine. His boyish nasal instrument is distinct and inimitable as it slithers up and down in pitch on “PRIDE.” Even when Lamar sounds like Eminem, or Drake, or OutKast, he sounds like himself, and he arguably outpaces them all as a writer. On “FEAR.,” he relays daily threats from his mom (“I’ll beat your ass, keep talking back/I’ll beat your ass, who bought you that? You stole it”) and from his neighbors (“I’ll probably die because I ain’t know Demarcus was snitching/I’ll probably die at these house parties fucking with bitches”) over low-slung blues stirred by The Alchemist. Lamar’s recitation is so effortless you wonder where he breathes, or if he does at all.

Kendrick is a relic of the mid-aughts rap blog era, where bedroom WordPress pages would post .zips of albums by amateurs. After years of such releases, Kendrick dropped a self-titled EP in 2009 that featured Big Pooh from Little Brother and elicited such Nah Right comments as “I like the beats on this” and “who da fuk?” Accolades swelled with each project; by 2011, he was considering signing with Dr. Dre; by 2013, he was playing “SNL” and touring with Kanye West. He came of age with his fans, and by 2015’s To Pimp a Butterfly, he put to music their chest-clenched frustrations. Ever the curtain-puller, he released an album of untitled and unmastered drafts and grew his hair out. His short absence, even after lending Taylor Swift a verse, has been made to feel longer by his media shyness and a surging tide of new rappers shuttled out daily.

Throughout it all, he’s avoided the boxed-in fates of predecessors like Nas and peers like J. Cole through an electric originality and curiosity. He mastered rap not for mastery’s sake, but to use it as a form, undeterred by slow-eared fans who’ll only highlight his “simplest lines.” His best new trick is repetition; it offsets his density and drills his ideas, as enthralling as a Sunday sermon or pre-fight chirp session. There have been few threats committed to record as sincere as, “Let somebody touch my mama, touch my sister, touch my woman/Touch my daddy, touch my niece, touch my nephew, touch my brother”—you tick down the list along with him, slot in your own lifelong bonds with loved ones. Such internal processing plays out through the album’s Greek chorus, via the singer Bēkon, who speaks in riddles of balance throughout: “Is it wickedness, is it weakness;” “Love’s gonna get you killed, but pride’s gonna be the death of you;” “It was always me versus the world/Until I found it’s me versus me.”

DAMN. is best in these philosophical spaces. It lags slightly around the center, where the concept loosens: “LOYALTY.,” with Rihanna, has all the makings of a radio mainstay this summer, and is as low-stakes as the platform demands; it’s always fun to hear Rih rap, and her presence is its most interesting aspect. “LUST.” would sound better if it weren’t next to an ear-worm as tender as “LOVE.,” which slow-dances between Zacari falsettos and Lamar’s sheepish read of the girl who fills him up. Between the two tracks, it’s easy to tell which force is tugging at him harder.

The record’s few lulls succumb to what surrounds them. The springboard bounce of “HUMBLE.,” the war chant of “DNA.,” and hot steel of “XXX.” show Kendrick in his element, fast and lucid, like Eazy-E with college credits and Mike WiLL beats. The production is taut and clean, but schizophrenic, often splicing two or three loops into a track and swaying between tempos, closer in kin to good kid, m.A.A.d city’s siren-synths than Butterfly’s brass solos. If he was “black as the moon” on his last album, he’s an “Israelite” here, refusing to identify himself by the shade of his skin but fluent in the contents of his D.N.A. Butterfly floated along to soften its scathing stance—“We hate po-po” sounds better over a smooth saxophone—but with so many “wack artists” in play, what’s the reward for upliftment? Kendrick is so alone at his altitude that when he acknowledges Fox News, let alone Donald Trump, it feels like a favor to them both.

Still, the album exists for “DUCKWORTH.” It’s the final piece of the TDE puzzle, a homegrown label of Compton natives that happened to deliver the best rapper of his generation. If we’re to believe the song’s last gunshot—and its seamless loop back to track one—much of DAMN. is written from the perspective of a Kendrick Lamar who grew up without a father to guide him away from the sinful temptations outside his home. He bobs in and out of this perspective, but the repeated pledges to loyalty and martyrdom evoke the life and mind of a young gang member who carries his neighborhood flag because no one’s proved to him that he shouldn’t. These choices, Lamar suggests, aren’t pre-determined or innate, but in constant dialogue with and in reaction to their surrounding circumstances. They aren’t above or beneath anyone who can hear his voice. Success and failure choose their subjects at their whim; we’re as grateful as Kendrick for his fate.

With his band Car Seat Headrest, Will Toledo has constructed the perfect vehicle for his obsessions. Since its inception in 2010, it’s become a highly referential project with a series of related album titles (2015’s Teens of Style preceded 2016’s Teens of Denial) and nods to other songs and bands from the Cars to Modest Mouse to They Might Be Giants. But the connection he makes to the music of others is nothing compared to the density of the internal references. A chorus from one song might show up as the bridge in another; a lyric might connect to an observation made earlier in the record, or even the record before. And Toledo’s constant tinkering goes beyond hiding Easter eggs; he also revisits older recordings until he gets them right. Teens of Style consisted of re-recorded versions of songs culled from his vast catalog (he put out nine releases on Bandcamp before signing to Matador). And now he has taken that re-make/re-model impulse even further.

The new Car Seat Headrest album, Twin Fantasy, is a completely re-recorded version of an album that Toledo originally released in 2011. There’s not much precedent for this sort of do-over—if this were film, say, it’d be like Steven Soderbergh re-making Sex, Lies and Videotape, which I could actually see him doing at some point. But Toledo, two years after his last batch of new songs, apparently believes enough in this album to think that he can make a better version of it to share with the wider world.

Twin Fantasy isn’t just another one of Toledo’s Bandcamp albums. It’s an ambitious song cycle that’s been held up by his small but fervent online cult as his masterpiece. The songs explore in painful detail the narrator’s infatuation with a nameless man, a relationship that Toledo has said was based in part on his own experience. It was originally written when Toledo was 19, and the album is appropriately dense with confusion and anxiety and self-doubt, though the self-laceration is characteristically cut with laughs. And whether or not it fits the criteria of a concept album proper (there isn’t a clear narrative from song-to-song), Twin Fantasy feels very much like an album about a single experience. Aside from an offhand comment about an ex or two, there are only two people in every song—the person singing, and the guy to whom it’s addressed (“Most of the time that I use the word ‘you’/Well you know that I’m mostly singing about you,” Toledo sings on “Nervous Young Inhumans”). If the person delivering the lines wasn’t so funny, the level of obsession might be a little scary. But Toledo pulls off an album with a jarring degree of specificity that touches on feelings familiar to almost anyone who has experienced young desire and heartbreak.

Toledo’s narrator in Twin Fantasy wants to get so close to the object of his affection that they essentially fuse together, but all he can think about is everything that’s pulling them apart. He sees images of his beloved everywhere (“When the train came it was so big and powerful...I wanted to put my arms around it”) while suspecting they’re too fucked and damaged to make it work (”We were wrecks before we crashed into each other”). He writes about watching movies and taking drugs, relays a story about coming out to his friends while pretending to be drunk, notes that having a body can be a drag. The story he tells is not about what happens, but what almost happens, what he wants to happen, what he wishes didn’t happen. The present moment is always undercut by a memory or a wish; strictly from reading the lyric sheet, it’s never entirely clear if the relationship is something real or something that is happening in Toledo’s head. The promise of pleasure is washed out by feelings of dread.

This makes Twin Fantasy sound grim and somber, but it’s actually the opposite. The explosive arrangements and Toledo’s delivery make it much more of a dark comedy. Brilliant individual lines pile up (”My soul yearns for a fugitive from the laws of nature” is a line that Silver Jews’ David Berman wishes he wrote), but the record’s real genius is in how the songs simmer and then burst, in perfect sync with the arc of the feelings. Early highlight “Beach Life-In-Death” stretches over 13 minutes, an epic meditation on raw want and jet-black self-loathing (”I am almost completely soulless, I am incapable of being human…it should be called anti-depression, as a friend of mine suggested, because it’s not the sadness that hurts you, it’s the brain’s reaction against it”) with instantly memorable screamed choruses worthy of the finest power pop.

”Bodys” has the gleaming pulse of the Strokes, and finds Toledo commenting on the song in real-time as it unfolds—“Is it the chorus yet? No. It’s just a building of the verse, so when the chorus does come it’ll be more rewarding”—and then it delivers on that observation, with layered vocals that bring to mind the stacked harmonies of ELO. The songs never stay still, for better or worse, they’re always in the process of building up or breaking down, which makes this jagged tail feel even more restless.

Some will find it shocking that an even lower-fi version of this album exists. The production values are somewhere on the lower end of inexpensive mid-tier indie rock, but the meat-and-potatoes sonics ultimately serve to make the record sound timeless. Give or take a Skype reference, it could have come out in 1994. It’s hard to know how the faithful who have been living with this album for half a decade will take its reinvention. Given the force of the music, the improved sonics give it greater weight, and the existence of two versions somehow makes the whole thing even more interesting—fading memory reflected and then re-assembled—and it’s hard to hear this re-visit as anything but a triumph. Twin Fantasy is not a perfect record—the latter half is bogged down by soundscape-y passages and spoken word, for one thing—but that only validates it as a powerful document of teenaged pain and longing.

Each music video for Björk’s 2015 album Vulnicura featured the Icelandic artist on camera alone. Through her use of virtual reality, you were beside her as she crawled out of a cave and danced at dawn lakeside; you swirled inside her mouth or moved into her sherbert-neon computer-generated body. It was intimate to see and feel her isolation, her heartbreak, and ultimately her healing as she sewed up a wound in her chest and walked away. The final statement of Vulnicura’s sweeping narrative about ending a relationship with her longtime partner was that after all this, Björk was finally alone.

It’s easier to create a utopia in isolation. If only we didn’t have this misbegotten, biologic desire to welcome someone else into our world. Another person? With me right now? I’m good, thanks. Yet most of us persist in this welcoming, an act that requires so much patience, compassion, and sacrifice because we believe that by co-organizing a perfect world for two, we might come closer to knowing love. Add to this small world a child and it seems like a miracle—a small paradise immune to the horrors outside of it. “If you feel this world is not heading the right way,” Björk said recently, “you have to be DIY and make a little fortress.” It’s within this matriarchal frame that Björk and her co-producer Alejandro Ghersi (aka Arca) created the challenging album Utopia. It’s a long, skittering discovery of googly-eyed romance, a rebuke of the violence inherited by men, and a generous offering of love song after love song, rendered musically with unerring elegance and passion.

The four decades of Björk’s music can be seen, simply enough, as a long trek to detail every last tendril of spiritual energy and spark of emotion that has existed in the world. Her relationship to feeling is particularly spatial, living within environments built Björk-tough for all the screams and whispers of history: emotional landscapes, hidden places, internal nebulas, mutual coordinates. Her shift from avant-garde pop star to immersive multimedia artist is not brand-building in a career sense—rather, it’s in service of having more tools for this restless excavation of human senses, their origins and futures. If this seems high-minded, it’s because it is, but it’s also because Björk’s music now exists on ever grander musical staffs, her lingua franca is that which is rarely broached in casual conversation: How does it really feel to lose someone? How does it really feel to start loving again?

The former was the focus of Vulnicura, a breakup album of strings and electric thuds that grounded her music for many listeners. But a crater of loss is easier to describe than the feeling that might begin to fill it, and accordingly, a denser fog hovers over the music of Utopia. “How to capture all this love?” she sings on the near 10-minute epic “Body Memory.” She knows it’s not easy, “like threading an ocean through a needle.” Her first single “The Gate” is a good starting point, though, the crossroads between old heartbreak and new wonderment. The chest wound she repaired becomes the “gate” through which this new love enters. Groups of flutes and synths zoom from one side of the song to the other, unconcerned with sub-basement beat gurgling beneath, or Björk savoring every consonant from elongated s’s to trilled r’s.

Utopia is Björk’s flute album much the way the darkly intimate Vespertine leaned on the celeste or Medúlla was composed mostly of human voices, or Volta had brass and Biophilia its choirs. But Utopia is, more accurately, an album of breath and wind. After a few plucks of harp on the first two songs—the arresting banquet of “Arisen My Senses” and the gentle touch of “Blissing Me”—Utopia lives almost entirely suspended in the air. Its orchestration is carried by a small flute ensemble, the Icelandic Hamrahlid Choir, Harmonic Whirlies, and a collection of birdsongs culled both from Iceland and Arca’s homeland of Venezuela. The arrangement on the album flits and flutters everywhere, hard to grasp, much like modern classical composer Olivier Messiaen’s serialist compositions or even his ones composed to mimic birdsong. All throughout the album we hear the singing of birds called the Montezuma Oropendola—the one that sounds like a Moog synth in a microwave—and the Musician Wren, whose call is one of a few birds that sings in melodies similar to human music. We hear all this breath rushing through metal, wood, plastic, cartilage, and muscle, all in largely minor, dissonant modes. At 72 minutes, this is the longest studio album of her career. Björk doesn’t find love with three chords and the truth, she finds love through an endless interrogation of every note there is.

Accompanying this airy, grandiose mood are, thankfully, a few moments of levity. At one point she offers that she is “Googling ‘love’”—a dizzying and delightful image—and she gets legit pissed off at how beautiful nature is: “This fucking mist/These cliffs are just showing off.” If the first half of Utopia crawls through the brambles of welcoming someone new, exchanging mp3s, warming the heart “on this log fire of love,” the second half reckons with a world that can’t fully support it. The pain of Vulnicura turns white-hot on “Sue Me,” a kiss-off to her ex-partner Matthew Barney who, in 2015, did sue her for custody of their child. It relies heavily on the bodily percussion of Arca, a martial kick drum whose provenance is closer to a battering ram on a dungeon door than Pro Tools.

The traumas of Björk’s past—affairs and “fuck-ups” are plainly stated on Utopia—are not used as a weapon so much as they become symbols of an impossibly broken system. She sings that “he took it from his father/Who took it from his father/Who took it from his father.” As ever, Björk becomes a hunter for the origins of her emotions and a ward for their future. “Let’s break this curse/So it won’t fall on our daughter,” she sings, “And her daughter/And her daughter/Or let this sink into her DNA.” She places all these words in her mezzo register, pushing them out from the bottom of her lungs.

A close collaborator of Björk’s, the singer ANOHNI (along with artists Kembra Pfahler, Johanna Constantine, Bianca Casady, and Sierra Casady) once etched into marble slabs 13 tenets of “Future Feminism” as part of an exhibition of the same name. The tenets are radical commandments crucial to reconstructing a better future driven by women and their care for the earth. It’s as if, by the end of the record, Björk descends from the mount with these tablets in arms for her final three songs. Here the fog of Utopia begins to clear, flutes uncluster, modes turn major, and Arca’s threshing abates. Not since the chorus of “Jóga” has such a feeling of release and catharsis come over a Björk record.

This feeling pours into “Future Forever,” the final track, one of the finest songs of Björk’s career. She sings: “See this possible future and be in it/Hold fast for love, forever.” What glowing simplicity her words now possess. They are irreducible in their meaning, like on “Tabula Rasa” when she sings this to her daughter: “My deepest wish is that you’re immersed in grace and dignity.” There is no image or metaphor underneath, just emotional mass. Björk’s lyrics have become the anvil that forges her voice and the music around it. They may arc and bend in odd new ways, but that text is unshakable. You take her at her word.

So when Björk finally describes her utopia, it already feels etched in marble. “Future Forever” has no flutes or electronics, just a synth organ, spare and holy. After the restlessness of the album, it floats in stasis. In it is an intimate and perfect world of matriarchal domes and musical scaffolding. She summons the love she has tried to describe, that ocean through a needle. “Now you mirror at me,” Björk sings at the end, “Who I used to be/What I gave to the world, you’ve given back at me.” The greatest love songs are measured by the depth from which they surface. If these words in Utopia seem unfathomable, a bit much, a little too real, perhaps it’s because our imperfect world was not built to support it. Björk’s utopia begins with someone else, and so does ours.

Being a great rapper has never been a prerequisite for making great rap music, but few rappers have ever tested that premise quite as aggressively as Playboi Carti. On his self-titled 2017 debut, the twitchy Atlanta rapper compensated for his shortcomings as a lyricist with vision and spirit, bouncing his sticky ad-libs off of gloopy, gummy beats that played out with the insane logic of a “Double Dare” obstacle course. “Damn, my shit so radical,” Carti bragged, and it truly was. Yet, amazingly, that project sounds almost conservative compared to Die Lit, a 57-minute sugar high that’s even wilder, more disorienting, and more perversely infectious than its predecessor.

Atlanta swag-rap pioneers Travis Porter and Rich Kidz paved the way for Carti’s giddy style, but even they never took it to such delirious extremes. Die Lit is all cream filling, no Oreo. It’s letting a 4-year-old pour his own salad dressing then watching as he absolutely floods his plate with Hidden Valley Ranch. It’s those levels of Mario where the pipes and clouds spew so many coins and one-ups at you that you wonder why you spent all those other levels collecting them one by one. This is music that fundamentally recalibrates the brain’s reward centers.

Once again, the primary architect behind these addictive fragmented tones is producer Pi’erre Bourne, working from a reserve of what sound like hacked Gameboys, busted subwoofers, and chopped and screwed snippets of Ratatat records. Bourne is a one man Acme Corporation assembly line, and in Carti he’s found the perfect foil for his mischief, a fellow iconoclast similarly willing to test the boundaries between catchy and obnoxious. The two have some of the most quixotic chemistry of any producer/rapper combo since Zaytoven and Gucci Mane disrupted Atlanta’s rap scene more than a decade ago.

Where Carti’s full-length last year was technically a mixtape, Die Lit is being marketed as his official debut, which is often when commercial considerations set in and the fun ends. But while the album is loaded with guest features, including ones from Travis Scott and Nicki Minaj, they never upset its surrealist vision. Even “Fell in Luv (feat. Bryson Tiller)” isn’t as cynical as title threatens; it’s just a typically loopy Playboi Carti song with a Bryson Tiller verse that’s mixed like somebody tried to erase it then gave up. With its victorious pianos, the Lil Uzi Vert-assisted triumph anthem “Shoota” is the album’s one obvious concession to radio’s ideal of tunefulness, but it’s an absolute stunner of a track, and it also works as a window to the world outside of Bourne’s studio, highlighting just how odd and malformed all the beats around it are.

Mostly, Die Lit uses outside voices as accent pieces. London grime icon Skepta elbows his way into “Lean 4 Real,” and although his accent cuts a sharp contrast against nearly any American rapper, here it’s just his mere enunciation that comes as a shock. Young Thug joins Carti in making lots of silly noises on “Choppa Won’t Miss,” and they sound like kids playing over a toy chest. Bourne even gets two verses, because really almost any voice will suffice on music like this, and his is serviceable enough (“Bags of the future/Did it all off computers” is also a pretty solid brag for a producer).

In an Atlanta rap scene that tends to progress incrementally, with artists building off of a shared pool of ideas and advancing the breakthroughs of others, Die Lit is an anomaly, an album that works almost completely from its own lunatic script. At its best—which is to say almost the entire thing, really—the album almost seems to suspend gravity. How does a rapper this basic pull off a project this electrifying? No, Carti’s rapping isn’t any better this time out. And no, it really doesn’t matter. When the carnival itself is this magnificent, there’s no need to nitpick the ring-leader.

Over six albums, Victoria Legrand and Alex Scally of Beach House have offered the same enticement: There’s a place I want to take you; help me to name it. The implicit promise has always been that if you opened up entirely, gave enough of yourself, the nameless sensation they evoke would finally come into focus, and the shapes moving beneath the surface of their music would resolve. You would finally understand if you came closer, stayed longer, looked deeper.

You could sense the now-venerable Baltimore duo playing this game in advance of their seventh album, simply called 7. The first single, Scally noted slyly to Pitchfork, came out on February 14—2/14, or two plus one plus four equals seven. The album brought their catalog to 77 songs, and the record’s initial issue number was 777. What did all this mystical numerology amount to when you squinted at it? Nothing of course, except to set the stage, light the incense. It’s the magician’s pre-trick pantomime, where he turns up his palms and rolls up his sleeves, for no other purpose than to make you lean in closer and grin harder. “We spend a lot of time creatively making mountains out of nothingness,” Scally added.

Inducing indefinable yearnings, tracing patterns in the air—this is the essence of Beach House’s art. They usher us repeatedly into familiar territory and encourage us to notice the same things within it: the way a dim glow never surges or abates, how sensations burrow into the mind and color our memories. But with each album, they somehow render this terrain alien again, allowing us to run our hands over the same irregularities in fresh astonishment.

With 7, they’ve parted ways with longtime producer Chris Coady and teamed with Panda Bear and MGMT producer and former Spacemen 3 member Peter Kember, who goes by Sonic Boom. The result is their heaviest and most immersive-sounding album. It’s darker, thicker, set at a deeper spot in the woods. The gentle drum programming of earlier records has been swept aside for thunderous crashes: The drums on opener “Dark Spring” have the resounding weight of My Bloody Valentine’s “Only Shallow,” and the mix has a smeared, heat-sick quality that brings all of Loveless to mind. Low-end sounds, like the thrumming guitar that pierces “Dive” have real menace: The insistent thud inside “Drunk in LA” is like a hand tapping your solar plexus. This is the first Beach House record that, in headphones, will make you feel buffeted.

You are never quite sure about the size of the sounds on a Beach House song; intimate moments are massive, and vice versa. Most of the record feels recorded and mixed from a low spot gazing up, with sounds looming above, but then grass-blade details resolve themselves in the foreground. Legrand’s voice doubles on the chorus of “Pay No Mind,” transforming her from wisp to leviathan in an instant. On “Dive,” she sounds as imposing as the thumping drums, but a humming synth the size of a music box runs alongside her, confusing your sense of scale. On “L’Inconnue,” her vocal lines pan from left to right and pool in on themselves. Her breath fills every corner of space. When the track fills out—some guitars, resonant drums, a choral patch—they appear as if from inside her rib cage. She’s never sounded bigger, or less mortal, than she does here.

These perspective tricks are the tools of film-making as much as of music, and Beach House’s music is full of cuts, dissolves, fades, super-imposures. You enter their records the way you settle into a movie seat, asking to be subsumed and bathed in light. Even Legrand’s lyrics function like rapturous, lingering takes. “Rolling clouds over cement,” she sings on “Drunk in LA” Like Stevie Nicks, to whom she is often compared, or Orson Welles, to whom she is never compared, she grasps how readily we latch onto rich, intoning voices, how we can’t help but find ourselves believing in what they say. A voice like hers is its own kind of authority, and she luxuriates in the sound of words leaving her mouth.

Measuring Beach House albums against one another is tricky—how do you compare daydreams? But on a sensory level, you feel whether the spell is working, and how potent it remains. On 7, all the contrasts that mark their music are dialed up to blinding; you are plunged into darkness and then showered in light. The experience is so enveloping that you find yourself contending, once again, with that familiar itch to locate meaning. The secret at the heart of Beach House’s evocative music remains the same—there is no specific place Legrand wants to take you. But there will always be… someplace you’d rather be. Beach House will always help you dream of it.

Jon Hopkins is playing God. That much is clear as soon as “Singularity,” the lead and title song on his first album since 2013’s Mercury Prize-nominated Immunity, shivers into being. A ferrous wasteland of synthesizer overhung by evaporated strings and guitar merge into a remarkably complete sonic landscape — the land and sky of a new world, with its own alien physics, its own genesis and apocalypse. Hopkins keeps hanging these strange planets in wobbly orbits throughout Singularity, forming a universe that pulses with deep consciousness and a sense of endless discovery.

Hopkins was known as a hired hand for Coldplay, Brian Eno, and Imogen Heap, with a sideline in tasteful IDM records until Immunity promoted him to noted techno auteur. Like that breakthrough, Singularity is a beat-music odyssey pitched between acid house and introspective ambient bliss, constant change and eternal return, sublunary and sublime. It also combines many other opposites into thrillingly unstable wholes. The producer’s distinctive techno is coarse and granular, as if electricity were a solid you could grind in a mill, yet it flows in a graceful stream. It squelches like muck and shines like crystal. It beats like a body, but it moves like a mind.

Singularity begins with a three-song voyage through a realm that’s recognizable from Immunity epic “Open Eye Signal,” one where much of the rhythm occurs in negative space. For a techno producer, Hopkins has a counterintuitive way of treating sound as something huge and immobile, then scything crop circles into those heavy frequencies to create a sense of motion. His beats are blanks, and his tracks feel unbound from the metronome. “Emerald Rush” climbs a ladder of Laraaji-like arpeggios and mountainous chord changes to some hidden summit of consciousness. The track features additional drum programming by Clark, another tailor of the fabric of spacetime—something Hopkins turns inside out at the drop on “Neon Pattern Drum.”

This is the kind of album that could only be realized by an expert technician and holistic composer, but Hopkins’ taste for popular music is also apparent. Even his most arcane compositions, like the sideways wobble of “C O S M,” are generous with melody. He taps into something distinctly spiritual and medicinal on Singularity, an urge to transform and heal through a trancelike ritual fusing techno with pop. That quality goes deeper than some meditation-tape song titles (”Everything Connected,” “Feel First Life,” “Luminous Beings”) and a couple of new age piano pieces.

Hopkins recently told The New Yorker that Singularity capped a period of seeking in his life, a time when he devoted himself to “desert treks, controlled breathing, [and] freezing baths.” He bottled that intensity in grooves that heave themselves into being, discovering their forms moment by moment. The songs here are about 75 percent build and 25 percent release, which is gripping, faintly exhausting, and, if you’re ready to go there, transcendent. Hopkins seems to model his music on the infinite cycles of destruction and rebirth that power the universe—but we, too, are part of the scheme. Singularity is ultimately grounded in the personal, not the cosmic, which is what makes this head music so rich.

Before picking up a guitar for 2014’s Bury Me at Makeout Creek, Mitski Miyawaki’s instrument of choice was the piano. She played it on the two records she created as a studio composition major in college, where she was backed by a gigantic student orchestra. Once again behind the keys, her fifth album, Be the Cowboy, displays Mitski’s knowledge of song structure and her ability to bend any idea to her will. These 14 complex compositions warp the pop textbook into something more knotty and internal, creating a unique zone where the 27-year-old thrives: She’s never sounded so large, even in the record’s quietest moments.

In this way, Be the Cowboy radiates assurance. Whereas 2016’s Puberty 2 was drenched in distortion, here, Mitski and her longtime producer Patrick Hyland avoid the sound almost entirely. When the fuzzy drone does appear, it is purposeful, like on opener “Geyser,” where it interrupts a haze of organ and strings to announce a violent eruption of desire. Without the guitar and her typically doubled vocals, she allows herself to crack; for the first time, she seems fully content with the vulnerability.

Mitski is a peerless excavator of her own anxieties, infatuations, and ugliness and she examines them all through the lens of fame. She appears on the record’s cover wearing a white floral swim cap and heavy lipstick, a pair of tweezers honing in on a stray eyelash, symbolizing both a desire for control and the acknowledgment that such concerns can ultimately be futile. At the end of the video for the disco-pop banger “Nobody,” the camera pans back to reveal her to be another performer under the studio lights. She’s candid about how making music can be as depleting as it is fulfilling. “I gave too much of my heart tonight/Can you come to where I’m staying and/Make some extra love/That I can save till to tomorrow’s show,” she pleads on the jagged “Remember My Name.”

And with fame comes a fantastic loneliness. Be the Cowboy delves into that harrowing moment in the vanity mirror when you realize what others see does not match your reflection. How can they think you are so big when you are actually so small? The solitude inside “Nobody” feels so comically inescapable that it is almost worth celebrating; she rolls the word around in her mouth, relishing the universe of possibilities within its emptiness. On the jangly and vaguely country “Lonesome Love,” Mitski slyly delivers the record’s heaviest hitting line: “Cause nobody butters me up like you, and/Nobody fucks me like me.” Even if Mitski channels an exaggerated aspect of herself or performing a character—in interviews she has described a woman whose icy exterior hides the vast cosmos of her internal passions—she commits herself to capture the truth of each role.

But these complexities only emphasize the point Mitski returns to on each of her records: love is manifold. Romance is all consuming and breathtaking; intimacy can be a cycle of toxic stillness. Be the Cowboy is a definitive statement on the myth of perfection. She can stretch to the heavens and sink into the ground. She can be everything at once, again and again. “I thought I’d traveled a long way/But I had circled the same old sin,” she gravely bellows on “A Horse Named Cold Air.” To the two elderly subjects of the devastating closer “Two Slow Dancers,” all those complexities can be relieved beneath the glow of a disco ball. In the album’s last breaths, the spotlight slowly fades from Mitski. She might be exhausted, but she is insatiable.

In Let’s Eat Grandma’s vision of utopia, some days you might look like an alien; others, you wake up invisible. In a recent interview, the British duo—Jenny Hollingworth and Rosa Walton, both 19 and friends since kindergarten—wrestled with the limits of gender as identity. Life would make more sense, they suggested, if physical appearances warped constantly to represent one’s inner self. Rather than be a body, said Walton, “I wanna be a concept.” If you’ve existed as a teenager, you can probably relate; now imagine releasing an album of self-described “experimental sludge pop” as a pair of 16-year-olds dressed like haunted twin dolls. The response was predictable: adult critics shocked that teenage girls could make music at all, let alone music this trippy.

That resistance to easy interpretation extends all the way to the name itself—which, granted, doesn’t exactly gesture towards virtuosity on first glance. “It’s a punctuation joke,” Hollingworth explained—an Eats, Shoots & Leaves type deal where one misplaced comma turns a dinner invite (“Let’s eat, Grandma!”) into a horror movie. But beyond an inside joke, the shape-shifting name embodies LEG’s creative ethos, slyly expanding on conventional notions of how music made by girls “should” sound. Their second album takes matters a step further. I’m All Ears doesn’t just defy demographic stereotypes—it sounds like nothing else in pop right now.

I, Gemini, the duo’s 2016 debut, felt childlike in the sense that it was quite literally written by children; back then, Walton and Hollingworth’s helium-pitch voices gave the impression of cartoon mice, even as they sang about dead cats and radioactive mushrooms. Mileage may have varied depending on one’s tolerance for freak-folk or dadaist poetry, but clearly this wasn’t amateur hour. Guiding LEG’s voracious instrumental experiments (glockenspiels, recorders, motherfucking KAZOOS) was a sense of total control. If anything, I, Gemini’s everything-at-once psychedelia spoke directly to the feeling of being a young teenager—a kaleidoscope of unknowns, as terrifying as it is cool.

Two years later, I’m All Ears delivers on its predecessor’s promise, and though its songs are coated with newfound gloss, they’re just as much of a trip. That much was clear from the first single, “Hot Pink”—a sighing, snarling pop banger, co-produced by SOPHIE alongside the Horrors’ Faris Badwan, that weaponizes the femininity that’s been leveled against the duo. “I’m just an object of disdain to you,” they sing jointly, their voices sickly sweet. “I’m only 17, I don’t know what you mean.” For a SOPHIE production, it’s relatively subdued, until the chorus shatters into sounds of breaking glass and failing machinery as the duo’s delivery bristles. “HOT PINK! Is it mine, is it?” they yelp, flipping the hue of drug-store lipstick and Barbie convertibles into a battle cry. The coexistence of hard and soft isn’t a study in contrasts but in synthesis, merging the two modes until you can’t tell where hard ends and soft begins.

That song’s final chorus is interrupted by a phone call, the first of many moments on I’m All Ears where technology casts an uncanny glow. Pizzicato strings re-imagine a ringtone on the “Missed Call (1)” interlude, and “It’s Not Just Me”—a gently glitched-out synth-pop number, and the album’s second SOPHIE/Badwan production—includes a profoundly Gen Z farewell: “I don’t wanna say goodbye/I guess I’ll see you when the screen is vibrating.” Translating our virtual lives into compelling art is a challenge that often leaves me cold; how do you convey the humanity of a conversation carried out in text bubbles without sounding corny? But I’m All Ears renders flattened communication as poignant, striking not because of the novelty of being made by teenagers but because it speaks with such commanding precision to the experience of a teenager in 2018. In that sense, the album’s pop synthetics aren’t such a drastic departure from LEG’s previous work; they heighten the surreal feeling of paradigm-shifting emotional experiences that transpire on a screen in your hand.

But despite the boldness of the production—uninhibited but never excessive, veering from Goblin-esque prog to pristine dance-pop to sludgy psych, sometimes in the same track—the album’s most mind-bending moments happen in Walton and Hollingworth’s writing. “Falling Into Me,” an ecstatic, street-lit roller-disco epic, opens with some of the most evocative lyrics I’ve heard all year: “I paved the backstreets with the mist of my brain/I crossed the gap between the platform and train.” (Amid all the headiness, three simple words later in the chorus—“You/Me/This”—are just as effective in describing the headrush of new romance.) And over the sullen guitar chords of “Cool & Collected,” LEG articulate the anxiety of feeling like a charmless nerd in front of your crush better than I’ve ever heard: “I still blur in the haze that you cut straight through.”

Rather than get lost in these insecurities, LEG uses them as fuel, embracing uncertainty as a psychedelic experience in its own right. And where “Cool & Collected” wallows, album closer “Donnie Darko” practically levitates. Listless midsummer psych-pop climaxes into strobing, cerebral ’80s disco for the home stretch of the 11-plus minute suite; we are left with Walton and Hollingworth lying on the tile of their bathroom floor, heads spinning, drunk with emotion. I imagine the scene illuminated just like the video for “Hot Pink,” where phone screens and secret rooms beam with an irresistible glow, feminine and sinister and ultimately unresolved—the girls disappear into a bright pink room, and that’s the last we see.

All of this reminds me that before it became known as the official shade of prescribed femininity, hot pink meant provocation. “Shocking pink” was introduced to the fashion world in the 1930s as the signature color of surrealist designer Elsa Schiaparelli, who collaborated with Salvador Dalí and, as a child, buried flower seeds in her nose and ears in an attempt to grow a garden on her face. Her designs were as weird as they were womanly, and shocking pink was no exception: “Bright, impossible, impudent, becoming, life-giving,” she once lovingly described it. You could say the same thing of Let’s Eat Grandma, whose bold, tender music at once captures teenage girlhood and transcends it entirely. I can’t imagine what they’ll do next.

Kamasi Washington—a tenor saxophonist, bandleader, and composer with the profile of a low-level pop star—designed his second full-length album as a metaphysical dyad, unfolding over two halves that each run over an hour. Far and away the strongest musical statement of his career, it’s also an exercise in contrast, if not outright contradiction.

“The Earth side of this album represents the world as I see it outwardly, the world that I am a part of,” Washington explained in advance press materials. “The Heaven side of this album represents the world as I see it inwardly, the world that is a part of me. Who I am and the choices I make lie somewhere in between.” (According to Discogs, a surprise third part, The Choice, comes as a CD tucked away in the album’s packaging; it wasn’t provided to reviewers, but it’s reported to contain five tracks—almost 40 minutes of additional music.)

This is a high-flown but still more intuitive concept than the one governing The Epic, Washington’s breakout 2015 debut, which sprawled over three hours and trafficked so heavily in heroic archetype that it should have a citation on Joseph Campbell’s Wikipedia page. Heaven and Earth proposes a play of external and internal realities—a bedrock of philosophical thought often framed as mind-body dualism. True to form, Washington presents this bifurcation more spiritually, as a pivoting balance of terrestrial and celestial concerns.

There’s a deadpan self-awareness to the framing of this theme, beginning with an album cover that depicts Washington like a Byzantine icon astride the Sea of Galilee. Musically, the idea coalesces best during the final track on Earth—an adrenalized piece of business called “One of One,” with a heraldic, hard-boppish horn line set against Afro-Latin polyrhythm and a blast of choral voices and orchestral strings. Its cyclical harmonic sequence creates a sensation of endless lift. That ascension brings us to the opening of Heaven, a sparkling interstellar overture called “The Space Travelers Lullaby.” Shifting strings and voices to the foreground, all billowy movement in a major key, it’s a cinematic theme whose rippling euphoria feels both magically ethereal and strenuously earned.

Washington wants it both ways, and that’s what he wants for you, too. As a listening experience, Heaven and Earth contains the most transcendent moments of his output thus far, as well as some of the gnarliest. His version of “Fists of Fury,” the Bruce Lee movie theme, falls into the latter camp, opening the whole affair à la Curtis Mayfield, in soul-warrior mode. The vocals on the track—by Patrice Quinn, a regular member of Washington’s entourage, and Dwight Trible, an emeritus alumnus of Horace Tapscott’s Pan Afrikan Peoples Arkestra—gradually move further into an exhortative mode. “We will no longer ask for justice,” they each declare, one after the other, in an echoing cadence that evokes the People’s Microphone. “Instead, we will take our retribution.”

Washington has smartly sequenced the double album in a pair of dramatic arcs. And he marshals his musicians with no less careful calculation. The heavy-tread cohesion and cyclonic undertow on Heaven and Earth serve a reminder of how much time has passed since the West Coast Get Down, Washington’s Los Angeles cohort, laid the tracks that became The Epic—late in 2011. Since its blockbuster release in 2015, Washington and his band, the Next Step, have maintained a touring schedule of the sort that few jazz groups are ever able to sustain. Along the way, assorted members of the West Coast Get Down, like bassist-turned-vocalist Thundercat and keyboardist Cameron Graves, have branched out on their own, with varying degrees of success.

A handful of them stand out on Heaven and Earth. Terrace Martin makes his lone appearance count, delivering a molten, supplicatory alto saxophone solo on a bounding modal tune called “Tiffakonkae.” Brandon Coleman fashions a psychedelic synth solo on “Connections,” whose low simmer and melodic contour recall the Joe Zawinul / Miles Davis invention “In a Silent Way.” (He also does excellent vocoder work on “Vi Lua Vi Sol,” suggesting a system upgrade to Sunlight-era Herbie Hancock.) Trumpeter Dontae Winslow distinguishes himself on a handful of tracks, including a syncopated charge through Freddie Hubbard’s “Hub-Tones.”

Scan that rundown of tunes and it’s clear: Washington remains enamored of the jazz tradition even as he insists on reshaping it. The heart of the complaint against him in jazz circles is his limited range as an improviser. He has no real instinct for developing harmonic momentum in a solo, and he slips too often into pentatonic pattern-work, as if an algorithm were kicking in. On the other hand, Washington’s strengths have never been clearer. His sound is sinewy and centered, his rhythmic footing sure. And he’s a catharsis engine who also knows when to shrewdly dial it back. (Hear how he begins his solo on “Song for the Fallen,” as if delivering a confidence.) Anyway, assessing Washington by the same standard as Mark Turner or Chris Potter, or any number of other virtuoso tenors, would be something other than apples-to-apples, and missing the point. One of his core achievements on Heaven and Earth—even more than on The Epic—is to create a framework in which his ardent, expressionistic style can carry a standard into battle.

The album hits its full, glorious stride during its last several tracks. “The Psalmnist,” a taut, unassailable post-bop theme by trombonist Ryan Porter, sparks one of the sharpest Washington solos on the album, before a virtuoso battle royal between drummers Tony Austin and Ronald Bruner, Jr. The next tune, “Show Us the Way,” opens with a modal crush of piano chords that recalls “Change of the Guard,” from The Epic. It culminates, after a rafters-raising Washington solo, in a refrain by the choir: “Dear Lord,” they sing, invoking John Coltrane, “Show us the way.”

The power of that moment, which carries through the final track, “Will You Sing,” lies in a vibrational parallel to the black church, and all the momentous weight that comes with it. Washington is flagrant in aligning his music with a tradition of transcendent struggle. The feeling he’s chasing is the feeling of someone who’s been to the mountaintop and come back with an urgent story to tell.

Sheck’s raw and unruly debut is a force to be reckoned with, a coming-of-age album from an über-hyped prospect that actually delivers on its promise.

For some time, rapping has stood alongside the wicked jump shot as one of the only legitimate hood escape hatches, and Sheck Wes tried his hand at both. Two years ago, he even skipped an important high school basketball game to pose in Kanye’s Yeezy Season 3 show at Madison Square Garden. His longtime friendship with NBA rookie Mo Bamba led to his breakout hit, which is still his most popular song to date. “Mo Bamba”—a song freestyled in 20 minutes and uploaded to SoundCloud days later without warning (and without Sheck’s knowledge) by co-producer 16yrold—ignited such buzz that Travis Scott and Kanye West signed him to a dual deal with Cactus Jack and G.O.O.D. Music, respectively. The song’s eerie melody and unruly energy serve as proper lead-ins to his full-length debut, MUDBOY. His hoop dreams have been forced to take a backseat now that his rap dreams are within reach.

MUDBOY delivers mosh raps with a cold, steely New York edge. The lo-fi and booming songs antagonize your senses and disrupt your day. Interspersed among the rowdy tracks are stories of Sheck’s trials as a “mudboy,” which he’s described as a process of toiling through grime to become a man. It’s its own coming-of-age album and the rare project from an über-hyped rap prospect that actually delivers on its promise.

Born to Senegalese parents, Sheck Wes split his childhood between Harlem and Milwaukee, Wisconsin. He has likened being in Milwaukee to being in prison and equated returning to New York with autonomy, and that pursuit of freedom is imbued and sometimes documented in his music. On the cusp of fame, Sheck’s mother shipped him to the motherland to study Islam, a pilgrimage he initially saw as a banishment and betrayal but now credits with a spiritual awakening. MUDBOY drinks all of this in, oscillating between autobiography and thrashing tribal chants. He bridges the gap between the DIY SoundCloud aesthetic and the Harlem youth subcultures he was tempered in.

Sheck collapses the space between “post-regional” rap and hyper-local rap with assists from Harlem producer Lunchbox and Miami producer Redda. Beats have trace elements of sounds near and far. They’re largely nightmarish alternatives to Pi’erre Bourne’s carnival attractions, forcing their way into your ear with the ugly, bass-boosted distortion of Ronny J (who has cranked up the wattage for Lil Pump, Smokepurpp, and Denzel Curry). Some sound extremely localized to NYC, others wouldn’t be out of place on Travis Scott’s Astroworld.

It’s somewhat ironic that Sheck Wes is signed to Scott’s Cactus Jack imprint because he’s almost the anti-Travis Scott. Where Scott is rigid in his raps and backed by a cabal of industry leaders, Sheck is unfastened and going it alone. This intuition extends to his ad-libs, chief among them “bitch,” which pops up frequently and at random, standing as a raw bearing of his emotions. “Why I say bitch so much? Let me explain it: It’s the only word where I can feel and hear all my anger,” he says on “Gmail.” Every utterance of the word—and MUDBOY by extension—feels like spontaneous combustion. His process is one of fluidity and recklessness, in sound and rhythm. Through him, you can hear the Harlem jigginess in his flows, the seismic hums of Kid Cudi, and the loose, informal ramblings of Lil B.

Like Playboi Carti, Sheck Wes was modeling before most had heard his raps, and both put an emphasis on form over function and style over structure. The inclination is to immediately hear Sheck’s songs as slapdash and superficial, owed largely to their lack of text, but doing so misses the point. Taken at face value, his rhymes are simple, but directness is the appeal, a force that delivers huge blows. To write it off as unremarkable is to risk looking like Zedd, being schooled on music theory by “Mo Bamba” co-producers Take a Day Trip after he took a shot at the song. It isn’t basic; it’s straightforward by design. Sheck has spoken openly about people getting “lost in the energy” in his music and missing the message. But as he put it recently: “I’m talking about some shit!”

Inside many of these amped-up jams are tales of self-discovery hiding in plain sight. “They just want the turnt shit/They don’t like the sad music,” Sheck laments on “WESPN.” But he sneaks in poignance anyway. “It gets tragic where I live, everything is negative/Hold the roaches in the crib, elevator full of piss/Everybody grew up tough, bunch of diamonds in the rough/Police ain’t never give a fuck, they just want us in them cuffs,” he raps on “Live Sheck Wes,” as clear and concise an indictment of big-city politics as any in rap. “Never Lost” recounts his month’s long exile to Senegal and all he learned in its aftermath. Later, on “Jiggy on the Shits,” this becomes a key part of his origin story, as he finesses his way back to America. “I turned a couple years into a couple months/I took my plan, and now I’m writing history,” he raps, adding in some Wolof—the native language of Senegal—for good measure. His writing is striking.

While MUDBOY is a strong and holistic statement from an upstart rapper, with the early-album run from “Live Sheck Wes” through “Chippi Chippi” being particularly stunning, these songs feel like underscores for the colossal “Mo Bamba.” It is not only the centerpiece but also a pure representation of what being a “mudboy” means: the fraternities immigrant kids find on the fringes of urban centers, the sense of community fostered in the New York underground, finding your escape hatch—be it balling or rapping—and pushing your way out the hood so that everyone you knew can share in that win. The song is in celebration of putting the city on and a rallying cry for those who might come after, following in his footsteps. That’s the essence carried within MUDBOY: the toil produces a man and a man clears a path for the next.

Robyn’s work urges on our braver selves. Without sermonizing, she shows us the dignity in our sorrow—throwing her heartbreak onto the dance floor, gulping in its neon glow like photosynthesis. Through her music, we discover our loneliest moments are no longer just valleys to suffer and endure: They are deeper, even beautiful, glimpses into our humanity. It seems possible that these moments are essential turns in our own journey, and that we are indestructible in them after all.

Throughout her career, Robyn has thrived by rejecting the pop music machine. Her genius was too great and too peculiar for the frothy Max Martin ditties of her youth, despite her early success with them in the ’90s. She had the prescience around the turn of the century to reject a deal with Jive Records, embrace her edgier club influences, and start her own imprint. (Jive’s rebound signee, Britney Spears, was never afforded the same route.) Robyn’s rebellion has made her pop’s avatar of exceptionalism: Her path whispers that we can be extraordinary, too, after rejecting the strictures that keep us docile. She cuts a powerful, needed figure in pop music, reasserting the autonomy of women in a genre that labors to keep them disposable; in particular, she subverts and updates the stereotypically male idea of the auteur, whose authenticity comes from a wellspring of self-reliance and removal.

And so Honey, Robyn’s sixth solo album and first in eight years, also carries the sheen of being created on purely individual terms, on a singular timeline. With its diaristic tracklist—sequenced in the order songs were written—the album builds a bridge from its predecessor, the bionic Body Talk, into a place of new conviction and warmth. It addresses several causes of the 39-year-old’s solo hiatus, from the death of her longtime producer and friend Christian Falk to her split and eventual reconciliation with her boyfriend, while extending the previous record’s conversation: What does it mean to forge human connections, to persevere, to be generous to yourself in loss and present for others in love?

But unlike the often frosty empowerment of Body Talk, these dialogues are presented casually, with slight builds and light hands: Airy house beats waft in benignly, a far cry from the martial four-to-the-floor of her past; snatches of chipper, tinny phone conversations unfurl over unhurried tropical house with the casual aplomb of a jam session. Still, Robyn presents them in a way that makes her resolutions feel both instinctive and deeply traveled; melodies and emotions resolve simultaneously, slowly, and imperfectly, without editorialized conclusions.

Honey opens itself gradually, as if in the half-life of Body Talk. The sterile, sober “Missing U” is threaded with fresh heartbreak, in the same school of cinematic beat drops that made her “Dancing on My Own” and “Hang With Me” such cathartic floor-fillers. It’s Honey’s most melancholy song, familiar in its duress, and Robyn’s voice carries the evolution: Where she once stripped her tone of cheeky inflections and small breathy affectations—singing with a sort of level sturdiness that amplified her plainspoken pain, Scandinavian to the marrow—here she is borderline gasping; her falsetto is sighing and acrobatic. Bewildered, she echoes in the vacuum between kickdrums, reaching blindly into “this empty space you left behind,” simply existing in loss. This realm is so eerie and empty it sounds post-apocalyptic, as synths interject like torturous memories, and the drums insist on their dull throb of grief, pushing home the devastating coda: “All the love you gave/It still defines me.” As she’s done so slyly in the past, her instrumental emotionally mirrors her words, deepening the cut of both.

Robyn’s path soon turns sunnier and softer; for an artist who brought such empathy to the ostracized role of the Other Woman in “Call Your Girlfriend,” there is no melodramatic, obsessive devotion to be found on Honey. On “Because It’s in the Music,” producers Joseph Mount and Klas Åhlund volley up a glittery, morose disco shuffle—like Giorgio Moroder after 10 spins of “Holocene”—as Robyn laments a song she shares with her ex-love, one she still spins with self-flagellating regularity to his empty side of the bed. But her compulsive behavior is more restrained now, quicker to ask for mercy: “Baby Forgive Me” is the rare Robyn song to ask something of anyone else. Her songs usually relay her experience of dancing alone without urging you do the same; she promises she’ll be “Indestructible” in love without mobilizing the masses behind her. By presenting how she processes her trauma alone, she opens a community to those who need it. (And an eccentric one, to boot: Hear the odd, yawping backing vocals here and marvel at the island of misfit toys Robyn can assemble at whim.)

”Send to Robin Immediately,” with its slow synthpop burn and sample of Lil Louis’ 1989 dance hit “French Kiss,” captures the tentative first steps of assertiveness after heartbreak. “If you’ve got something to say/Say it immediately,” she coos, not unkindly, over producer Kindness’ loping, snowballing pulse. But as it happens, Robyn and her beau won’t be doing much talking: “Honey,” object of so much fan beseeching, arrives next, like a sunbeam. This version, which Robyn labored over for years, is breezier than it was in its tentative debut on “Girls”; her throaty vocals, like her libido, command the room with full liberty. As she purrs her infatuation—“Every breath that whispers your name/It’s like emeralds on the pavement”—and follows it to the bedroom, the classic house beat gallops to match a racing pulse. The synths melt outward mirroring the euphoria of the lyrics; serene in her lust, she directs her lover to the flower “stuck in glitter strands of saliva.” It’s hazily gorgeous and excessively horny and dreamily decisive, with Robyn as the lone director and receiver.

Robyn and her love’s happy, third-act reunion feels inevitable after the thrall of “Honey”—though she briefly diverts to a ’90s house party on “Between the Lines,” and skitters off to the shore in an electro-samba ditty called “Beach 2k20” in which she basically speak-sings to a group WhatsApp thread about a waterside restaurant hang. (There’s also a sly, blink-and-miss-it vocal nod to her 1995 hit “Show Me Love.”) Its humidity nicely sets up the closing track, “Ever Again,” in which Robyn chirps she’s “Never gonna be brokenhearted/Ever again,” like Scarlett O’Hara clutching a drum machine. It’s as classic a Robyn narrative as any on the album: A passionate peak, full of loopholes, left to resolve offscreen with messy realism.

And so Robyn rides into the sunset, after nearly 15 years spent capturing the nobility of loneliness. It’s such an alluring idea that “Ever Again”’s bittersweet top-note (“Never gonna let it happen/Then it would be all for nothing”) leaves just a glancing blow. But here, finally, is the real romance of Honey: Instead of willing her relationship to be infallible, she’s banking instead that she can bear future pain without shattering. It’s a turn from the grand narrative of moving alone through the world, faltering a little less with each step until euphoria takes over. It’s joyful to hear that Robyn’s found this peace, and as ever, she champions us toward the same.

The second album from the Spanish singer is a remarkable feat, seamlessly linking flamenco’s characteristic melodrama to the heart-wrenching storytelling of modern, woman-flexing R&B.

Global bass, the internet-centric underground scene that began flourishing around the world in the late 2000s, emerged when young producers took their countries’ folk traditions and updated them for a millennial dancefloor. They used new technology to connect previously collapsed musical boundaries: Cumbia became digitized (Colombia, Mexico), salsa got remixed (Puerto Rico, New York), pow wow drums went electric (Canada), and some producers even transmogrified Andean pan flutes into intellectual bangers. Global bass became a precursor to the increasingly boundless way pop music works now, even as it became flattened into limp and canned versions of what some people dreadfully termed “trop-house,” not to mention the overall poisonous creep of EDM into its bloodstream.

The concept, though, is still intriguing: As the internet homogenizes individual music cultures into a big studio-quantized mish-mash, how do musicians retain the singularity of the hyper-local, often dissipating histories of their cultures? And alternately, is it preferable to take a rigid approach to that hyperlocality—or at least a defensive stance towards cultural specificity—if it stifles the kind of musical creativity that fosters a genre’s evolution.

One approach—a very successful one—lies in El Mal Querer, the relentlessly gorgeous album from Rosalía Vila Tobella, a 25-year-old Spanish singer with one foot steeped in her Catalan history and the other hypebae-sneakered foot sidling into the future. Rooted in flamenco—the Arabic-influenced Andalusian music which she has studied since a young age—El Mal Querer is a dramatic, romantic document that seamlessly links that tradition’s characteristic melodrama to the heart-wrenching storytelling of modern, woman-flexing R&B. Flamenco music carries the sound of Spanish history within it—you can practically hear the migration patterns—and Rosalía uses it to tell the story of a doomed relationship across 11 songs, each one serving as a new chapter. It is one of the most exciting and passionately composed albums to appear not only in the global bass tradition but in the pop and experimental spheres this year.

Thrillingly, Rosalía has figured out a way to situate her classical training alongside Justin Timberlake and Arthur Russell samples, glossy synths and hip-hop swing. With co-production from the Spanish producer El Guincho, El Mal Querer’s already delivered two hits—first, the slinky, hypnotic “Malamente,” where Rosalía’s honeyed voice works in counter-rhythm to flamenco-influenced syncopated handclaps. (Her stardom was definitely aided by the song’s video, in which she executes slick choreography while wearing a fluffy fake-fur jacket and tracksuit as a kind of Spanish answer to Rihanna.)

“Malamente” and its follow-up—the yearning jealousy bop “Pienso En Tu Mirá”—might imply a more radio-friendly album, but Rosalía is true to her hybrid ethic, and keeps it folkier as she maneuvers through the album’s heartbreak narrative. Even the astonishing “De Aquí No Sales,” which replaces the handclaps with samples of revved-up motorcycle engines as a downbeat, is more in the vocal tradition she was raised in. It alludes to the pared-down instrumentation of classic flamenco—a guitar, a clap, a stomp—but the emotion is sampled and patched directly into her voice. She has a lot to say, and does so with the drama and intensity flamenco requires: On that song, she declaims powerfully about domestic abuse and the justifications abusers use, while the bad-romance arc comes to a climax. “Mucho más a mí me duele, de lo que a ti te está doliendo,” she sings: This hurts me more than it hurts you.

A studious sense of tradition pervades Rosalía’s approach on El Mal Querer. The narrative of the album is based on The Romance of Flamenca, a manuscript from the 13th century about a woman whose lover keeps her locked up in a tower—“el mal querer” can be translated to something like “the bad desire.” Perhaps this is a defiant rejoinder to those who might be resistant to a new take on a timeworn style. In “Reniego,” based on a classic flamenco melody, the production is pared down, and her soprano bursts like fireworks, electric and elastic, the agony and pull of destructive romance coursing through it. The melismas sound easy for her, as if to prove she can do it, before going down more experimental roads again, playing around with pop ballad-style synths, vocoder, and a cheeky allusion to reggaetón’s dembow pulse by way of flamenco handclaps. It’s an adventurous foray and deceptively pretty: None of this, from the way her voice sprints across her angular harmonies to the complex rhythm patterns that weave through them, is easy. With Rosalía’s sense of grace, though, it sounds like it could be.

The British band’s outrageous and eclectic third album attests to the worth of putting in an honest effort in the face of near-constant gloom.

The 1975 dare to be too much. Led by frontman and lyricist Matty Healy, the quartet has made its name on an unruly brand of abundance throughout this decade: musically, referentially, emotionally, all of it. Did Healy pop pills, lick coke, and twirl a revolver before holding up a convenience store and getting shot in the torso—but ending up totally fine!—in the video for early hit “Robbers”? He did. Did they lavish the title I like it when you sleep, for you are so beautiful yet so unaware of it upon their second album because it was the only thing grandiloquent enough to match the record’s fizzy mix of sunblast synths, plastic guitars, and millennial neuroses? Of course. And did they preface their new LP, A Brief Inquiry Into Online Relationships, with a 24-page manifesto that includes manic scribbles (“THIS IDEA HAS BEEN DONE BEFORE”), a picture of Healy petting a dog whilst on the toilet, and a technophobic survey of our contemporary clusterfuck of an existence that concludes: “THE LEFT AND RIGHT GROW MORE APART BUT YOU CAN JUST CLICK ‘ADD TO CART.’” Yes, yes, and more yes. To infinity.

Such a riot of excess may cause the casual observer to think: Who the fuck do these guys think they are?! This is reasonable. But it is also misguided. Because the 1975 are a thrillingly unreasonable band for unreasonable times. Healy is their generational mouthpiece—a guy who’s never met a contradiction he couldn’t fully inhabit, to arresting effect.

The 29-year-old is a pop star who is both infatuated with and embarrassed by pop stardom. He will play his charismatic part onstage or in interviews and then immediately flog himself for doing so, as his incessant inner monologue does battle inside his skull. Five years ago, in an effort to quiet his brain buzz, he turned to heroin, and then to rehab, and is now a former addict who is wary of glamorizing the rock’n’roll clichés he’s lived through. He is constantly online and constantly alarmed by what that does to our sense of self, our humanity. He hates Trump but knows that talking about hating Trump is boring. He is the son of two British TV stars who, in his youth, was treated to regular family visits by the likes of Sting; he also once said, with a smile, that his “biggest fear” is “being Sting.” He’s an atheist who believes in a thing called love.

All of these curiosities play out spectacularly on A Brief Inquiry. The album is similar to its predecessor in its boundless sense of style, swerving from Afrobeats to brushed-snare jazz balladry to one track that sounds like a trap remix of a Bon Iver ayahuasca trip. But whereas I like it when you sleep sometimes could be a tick too clever and unwieldy, A Brief Inquiry, produced almost entirely by Healy and drummer George Daniel, is more purposeful. Take that Bon Iver-type freakout, “I Like America & America Likes Me,” where Healy’s voice is transformed into a smear of Auto-Tuned slogans, an adbot on the fritz. But listen closely and his bionic spasms start to sound like the meter readings of a society that’s moving too fast to process anything in a meaningful way. “Am I a liar?!/Will this help me lay down?!” Healy yelps, too harried to stop for answers, too wired to take a nap. It’s impossible to tell exactly where his actual voice ends and where the digitized effects take hold.

When it comes to the 1975’s more widescreen scope—filtering in culture’s ills along with personal ones—the album hits a daunting apex with “Love It If We Made It.” It is the rare Anthem for Our Time that actually gets the job done: This thing holds the mirror up to our collective faces so close you can see your breath on it. As gargantuan drums clear a path before him, Healy mimics the endless scroll, where dead refugees and dead rappers all slide by on the same timeline. He recasts one of the year’s most cursed tweets—“Thank you Kanye, very cool!”—into one of the year’s best lyrics, in turn laying bare Ye’s current fallen status as nothing more than mere flotsam for the churning news cycle. Healy repeats the track’s title for a vaguely optimistic hook, but his gasping delivery tells a different story. The song ends with staccato strings that recall a clock ruthlessly ticking down the seconds.

According to A Brief Inquiry, if there is any sort of solution to our modern apocalyptic predicament, it involves stepping outside, risking a broken heart, and searching for connections beyond the screen. And yet, Healy is the first one to acknowledge that this is harder than ever to do: The album’s only marriage is presented as a cautionary tale, read by Siri, about a troll who falls in love with the internet. “The Man Who Married a Robot” acts as a sly sequel to “Fitter Happier,” Radiohead’s doomsaying, robo-voiced nightmare from OK Computer. It sits atop a bed of treacly piano plinks, like a demented parody of a Facebook commercial that’s desperately trying to get you to log on again. In the end, the troll dies. The internet does not.

The members of the 1975 began playing together in their teens as an emo band, and they are still interested in wringing out unadulterated feeling from everything they touch. This is the thread that grounds even their most dubious dabblings, and makes their dilettantism amount to more than a series of stunts. At first, with its glistening synths and languid tempo, “I Couldn’t Be More in Love” seems like pure ’80s schmaltz, something that Michael Bolton could have cut between yacht rides. But instead of luxuriating in the musical ooze around him, Healy takes the slickness as a challenge and turns in his rawest performance on the entire album. Recorded the day before he entered rehab late last year, his vocals are frayed as he laments the end of a four-year relationship with the panic of a crashing pilot. When he howls, “What about these feelings I’ve got?” it sounds elemental, a refashioning of emo’s core into something jarring and new.

The album is bookended by a couple of songs that offer some hard-won comfort while nodding to the band’s hometown of Manchester and the lives they once led there. “Give Yourself a Try” is all pinched guitars and staticy drums, a salute to fellow Mancunians Joy Division and their singer, Ian Curtis, who killed himself at 23. On the song, Healy looks back at what he’s done, what he could have done better, and what he would do differently given the chance. He also mentions a 16-year-old 1975 fan who took her own life. “Won’t you give yourself a try?” he asks sweetly, over and over.

A Brief Inquiry ends with “I Always Wanna Die (Sometimes),” the most life-affirming 1975 song to date. Its familiar fist-pump theatrics bring to mind the Glastonbury-leveling power of another one of Manchester’s most imposing bands, Oasis. But this is more than a tribute. Healy takes the broad ambition and jubilance of a classic Oasis song and turns it inward, with words that acknowledge the mettle it takes to simply get through the day—words that could only come from him. “There’s no point in buying concrete shoes/I’ll refuse,” he sings, resolute, before giving up one more plea: “If you can’t survive; just try.” Life becomes him.

When Odd Future first tumbled out of Southern Los Angeles County in 2010, it wasn’t the high-strung antics of the group’s de facto figurehead Tyler, the Creator that tipped them into the spotlight. It was Earl Sweatshirt, unbelievably young (15? 16?) and skilled beyond his years, a methodical wordsmith whose splatterpunk murder fantasies were rendered all the more unsettling by his incredible poise. The video for “Earl” (off the mixtape of the same name), wherein Sweatshirt and company down a risky drug cocktail and party until they begin to decay, was integral in setting the then-unknown collective on its crash course with hip-hop notoriety. But just as Odd Future took off, Earl appeared to vanish. Once a menacing presence over Tyler’s post-Neptunes synth wheeze, Earl was frustratingly absent from the group’s inaugural round of live shows and festival spots as well as the second round of Odd Future solo efforts. The group refused to provide an explanation for the lingering absence of its best rapper when pressed, opting instead to lead fans through a quixotic “Free Earl” campaign immortalized in t-shirts, records, and elaborate satirical fan fiction.

After a winding investigation, Complex was eventually able to trace Earl to a Samoan retreat for at-risk teen boys. It seems his mother, a civil rights activist and law professor, had shipped him overseas to clear his head after behavioral problems bled into his schoolwork. Barring an expository chat with The New Yorker, Earl fell silent after the reveal until turning up unexpectedly on Twitter one night in early 2012 with a new song called “Home” that closed with Sweatshirt giddily announcing his return: “I’m baaaack. Bye.” He appeared on various ephemera afterward: a supremely anesthetized spot on “Super Rich Kids” off Frank Ocean’s Grammy Award winning Channel Orange, an unannounced freestyle on the posse cut “Oldie” from The **OF Tape Vol. 2 compilation, and tracks with OF compatriot Domo Genesis and Flying Lotus’ rap alter ego Captain Murphy. He seemed to pick right up where the maleficent EARL left off, the new verses touting the same deadpanned orgies of bloodletting and misanthropy.

It wasn’t until the end of 2012 release of the single “Chum” that Earl addressed his story in song. Built around a simple, affecting piano figure and clattering boom bap low end, “Chum” was a travelogue of a lost soul seemingly back on track. In it Earl opens up about a life of struggles, from the absence of his father, one-time South African Poet Laureate Keorapetse Kgositsile, after a split from his mother (“I just used to say I hate him in dishonest jest/ When honestly I miss this nigga like when I was six”), to discovering drugs and petty crime, finding a big brother in Tyler, and the fallout from the Complex expose. “Chum” was the most personal and direct he’d ever been on record; it was gobstopping without relying on the trick of sullying the youthful zest of his voice with grim stories of death and defilement.

Loosed from the nauseating gutbucket grit of EARL, Sweatshirt uses his Columbia Records debut Doris to convey a more varied palette of emotions. He challenges the uplifting mood of “Burgundy”’s jazzy Neptunes production, addressing the illness of his grandmother, insecurities about the new material, and lingering issues with his father in one fell swoop (“My priorities fucked up, I know it, I’m afraid I’m going to blow it/ When them expectations raising cause daddy was a poet”). He’s a distant lover on “Sunday”, trading verses with Frank Ocean about trying to tend to withering relationships as studio rats and touring musicians. “Hive” captures the sobering realities of L.A.’s inner city as Earl, his voice just above a whisper, speaks of hopeless commuters biking to jobs that don’t pay their bills (“From a city that’s recession hit/ Where stressed niggas could flex metal with pedals to rake pennies in”). The resignation in his voice in these moments of reflection is every bit as communicative as his unflappable stream of internal rhymes and arresting visual images.

Even in the face of the newfound depth in Earl’s songwriting, Doris’ primary concern is his wordplay, which presents itself in thickets of rhymes so dense they can register as inscrutable on first listen. “Hive”’s second verse opens with: “Desolate testaments trying to stay Jekyll-ish/ But most niggas Hyde, and Brenda just stays preg-a-nant,” a glob of offbeat references, double entendres, made up words, and brilliantly disguised slant rhymes that hit as great exercises in rhyming words well before the deeper meanings can be teased out. Doris is also relatively hookless; where heaping doses of melody helped Tyler, the Creator break form earlier this year with Wolf, here it’s just raps on raps on raps. Guests are frequent, but they either come out rhyming for dear life, as Odd Future affiliate Vince Staples does when he swipes “Hive” out from under Earl in the third verse. Or they play hype man like Wu-Tang Clan’s RZA on “Molasses” and Vince in the spirited pep talks between Earl’s verses on “Burgundy”. The focus never strays from Earl’s fractious, DOOM-influenced songwriting for long, and Doris prefers to dispense it in short, impactful bursts as the “half short and twice strong” EARL did in 2010.

The album breezes by in 44 minutes, but it feels longer. Earl favors droning, lumbering productions full of intriguing sound textures, but he pulls in enough curveballs to give the album a jerky energy. In the first few minutes alone, we get the airy keys and trap drums of opener “Pre”, brash horns and live drums on “Burgundy”, and piddling video game synths battling chunky bass on “20 Wave Caps”. Between the campy drum shuffle newly added to the end of the otherwise austere “Chum” and the shrill violin trills that usher in a shock beat change in the middle of “Centurion”, Doris gets as much of its jollies from settling into dark, forbidding soundscapes as it does from unexpectedly ripping us up out of them. Without the noirish serial killer stories of earlier work to fall back on, Earl has discovered new ways to shock and disorient the listener.

Doris is full on its author’s prodigious abilities as a formidable young voice in L.A.’s resurgent hip-hop scene, but it’s not as concerned with the wider significance of the moment as it is with disbelief it’s actually happening. As comebacks go, it’s shockingly insular and unassuming. Earl remains self-deprecating throughout; he produces a number of the album’s tracks under the telling moniker Randomblackdude. Even when he skirts the mainstream, he does so with cautious optimism. Earl made a television appearance with the Roots on "Late Night with Jimmy Fallon" this month, running through the boisterous “Burgundy” with eyes closed after a tense walk from the blue room to the stage. It was a peculiar event, the anticlimactic unveiling of a star who’d been the talk of rap circles for three years but scarcely able to relish the attention. With Doris, Odd Future’s Odysseus is finally back and chasing the ghosts out of his head.

With his latest record, the onetime teen prodigy reemerges as the face of a new sound and scene that blurs the line between avant-garde jazz and hip-hop.

It’s always been Earl versus the world. Fame found him at the age of 16, making him an internet sensation, then a meme, then an enigma, and finally, an icon. For an introverted kid who knew he could rap but was reluctant to accept the exposure and invasions of privacy that came with being a bona fide pop culture phenomenon, it’s been an uncomfortable evolution. Voracious fans threatened to consume not just his music but his personal life too. That same entitlement caused the “FREE EARL” campaign to mutate from eager appreciation to scary obsession and stoked fans’ demand for music during the three years since his last album—even as he was mourning his father’s death earlier this year. Rather than bask in the attention, he recoiled from it, setting himself apart from peers who maintain relevance through carefully strategized ubiquity. As he receded from the spotlight, his mystique grew—as did fans’ desire to hear him to do what he does best.

His followers tend to come in two flavors: those who gravitate to Earl, the spitter—the guy who dazzles with multisyllabic couplets and clever similes; and those come for Earl, the relatable mope—an avatar for their own emotional pain. But on Some Rap Songs listeners are challenged to take him not in parts but as a whole, in the form he is in now: a poet philosopher who is also the face of an emerging sound and scene.

Earl has always been a reflection of the collaborators around him. His first tape, Earl, and his official debut, Doris, rest squarely in the Odd Future canon. His second album, I Don’t Like Shit, I Don’t Go Outside, established Earl’s identity as a man apart from the then dissolving crew and saw him working with East Coast rappers also dealing with dark emotions and budding rap careers in New Jersey’s Da$h and New York City’s Wiki. Now, on Some Rap Songs, the 24-year-old has become the OG to a vanguard of younger artists who are blurring the lines between avant-garde jazz and hip-hop.

The world created by Earl and his new cohorts—including up-and-coming NYC rappers Medhane and MIKE, producer-rapper Sixpress, aka Ade Hakim, of the Bronx collective sLUms, and Gio Escobar, frontman for genre-bending ensemble Standing on the Corner—is based on abstraction, where form is secondary to mood. It’s where the concept of Blackness is radical and the practices of soul-searching are channelled through a lo-fi sound replete with off-kilter loops, samples that get chopped beyond recognition, and audio clips that feel both random and apropos.

Take first single “Nowhere2go,” produced by Darryl Johnson and Ade Hakim, which rides a jittery beat replete with stuttering loops, warped vocal samples, and loose percussion. The instrumental lands somewhere between disorienting and soothing, and it is the oddly perfect backdrop for a matter-of-fact Earl as he deadpans a heavy revelation about himself: “I think ... I spent my whole life depressed/Only thing on my mind was death/Didn’t know if my time was next.”

The project is distinctly rough around the edges, to great effect; there’s the sound of dust popping off vinyl and cassette hiss throughout. With these imperfections, Earl and company tap into the same sort of illegible, yet undeniable, feeling jazz musicians capture in slurred notes. The cross-influence between Earl and his cohorts is evident in his vocals too. On the Navy Blue-produced “The Bends,” Earl flexes what feels like a MIKE-like monotone to get off his stream-of-consciousness raps. That is, until you realize that MIKE’s own delivery is influenced by Earl. This is symbiosis, not thievery.

If the fact that Earl is a product of his circle of friends is the explicit story being told here, the implicit one is that he is a product of his parents. Though most of the album was written before the death of his father, South African poet Keorapetse Kgositsile, in January of this year, his presence looms in a way it hasn’t on past Earl projects. Resentment and laments of abandonment are replaced with acceptance and embrace. “My momma used to say she see my father in me/I said I was not offended,” he raps on “Azucar,” showing signs of reconciliation but only after acknowledging how the women in his life held him down during the bad times. “My cushion was a bosom on bad days/It’s not a black woman I can’t thank.”

On “Playing Possum,” we hear a cobbled together duet composed of recordings of his mother, Cheryl Harris, thanking Earl and describing him as a “cultural worker” in a keynote speech interwoven with his dad reciting an excerpt of a poem called “Anguish Longer Than Sorrow.” Taken altogether, the track is a letter from a loving son honoring his progenitors, a letter that his father did not get to hear before his death. Then, on penultimate song “Peanuts,” Earl grapples with his grief over a slow and out-of-tune piano sample and shouts out his uncle, African jazz legend Hugh Masekela, who passed away shortly after his father. The mourning gives way to catharsis on the Masekela-sampling finale. At the very end of the album, the second-hand guitars begin to wobble before glitching into silence. His uncle and father are gone, but Earl is still here, carrying on their artistic legacy—and, with the help of his collaborators, building his own.

The expertly sequenced and always vibrant debut from the Puerto Rican rapper collects every fascinating side of Bad Bunny into one singular statement.

In the first three years of his nascent career, Bad Bunny put out enough singles and did enough guest features to fill out several albums. As an audition for pop superstardom, it’s been impressive. He can adapt to seemingly any style—trap, R&B, reggaetón, bachata, dembow—with a heavy, nasal croon perpetually drenched in Auto-Tune. He became a huge star in 2018, circumventing terrestrial radio and government censorship to become the third-most streamed artist in the world on YouTube. Why does Bad Bunny even need to release an album?

In some ways, X 100PRE (a stylization of “por siempre” or “forever”) presents a new Bad Bunny, a bellwether for the new stars of urbano. Like his contemporaries J Balvin and Daddy Yankee, he’s refused to pick a lane or to repress parts of himself that might seem antithetical to an urbano audience historically resistant to deviations from traditional masculinity. He bucks gender norms (wearing cutoff shorts and nail polish) and uses his massive platform to decry domestic violence. With X 100PRE, we’re finally able to see all of these sides of Bad Bunny in a singular statement.

Free of bloated posse cuts and seven-minute remixes, X 100PRE’s guests are expertly calculated. There’s an absolutely filthy low-slung trap beat from global gentrifier Diplo (“200MPH”), a hook in Spanish from Drake (“MÍA”), a hookah-bar anthem with Dominican dembow don El Alfa (“La Romana”), and even a secret cameo from Latin music’s ultimate crossover artist, Ricky Martin (“Caro”). He’s also parted ways with DJ Luian and Hear This Music, who were instrumental in helping him bridge the gap between the reggaetón OGs and the new-school Latin trap artists. DJ Luian may have helped catapult Bad Bunny from the SoundCloud underground to the YouTube mainstream, but he also prevented him from making an album. Upon X100PRE’s release, he told Beats 1 he “never had the support” to do an LP. It’s a little crazy to think that, even as we witnessed Bad Bunny’s incredible pre-album run, we were watching an artist who felt like he was being held back.

It’s clear, however, the thrill that comes when he’s left to his own devices. X 100PRE reveals an artist both proud of and unafraid to tell the truth about where he comes from. On “Estamos Bien,” he brags about driving his Benz through the potholes in Puerto Rico’s poorly maintained roadways, then takes a nostalgia trip for the perreos of yesteryear on “Cuando Perriabas,” which recalls a “party de marquesinas” that should sound familiar to any boricuas from the island.

And even if his reference to the famous missing persons case of Rolandito Salas Jusino (“RLNDT”) feels a bit self-absorbed—“Y no sé si me raptaron o estoy perdido,” he sings, or, “I don’t know if they kidnapped me or if I’m lost”—those feelings of loss and hopelessness are still likely to resonate with anyone who remembers seeing posters with the young boy’s plastered all over the island. He even dabbles in the political: When he questions the logic of closing schools while new trap houses proliferate on “Ser Bichote,” he’s talking directly to La Junta de Control Fiscal.

Most of X 100PRE was produced by reggaetón veteran Marcos “Tainy” Masís and Roberto Rosado and from a production standpoint, it’s nearly flawless—the lone misstep being the ill-advised foray into pop-punk “Tenemos Que Hablar,” which features a stiffly programmed guitar riff that sounds like it was lifted from the Kidz Bop studio session for “Since U Been Gone.” But X 100PRE’s high points are numerous, like the two-part, beat-switching jam “La Romana” that expertly marries three genres birthed by Dominicans—bachata, dembow, and Latin trap; or the trap banger/ballad “Caro,” which is at once the hardest and softest track on the record.

Bad Bunny’s perspective is decidedly Puerto Rican, but he’s always drawn musical influence from across the diaspora, from Juan Gabriel’s Mexican boleros and Héctor Lavoe’s salsa to the Colombian (J Balvin) and Puerto Rican (Daddy Yankee) reggaetóneros and trap stars (Ozuna) he’s been collaborating with. And while much has been made of his similarities to Drake’s sad-famous rich-boy aesthetic, it only takes a few seconds of their duet “MÍA” to see that the influence flows both ways. The synthesis of this Pan-Latino perspective is difficult to express in any language, yet X 100PRE’s masterful sequencing somehow manages to weave a diverse arrangement of styles into a coherent statement, one that represents one of the most honest depictions of urbano muisc. Because while Latinidad might consist of a collection of distinct and vibrant cultures, they’re in constant conversation—from América Central to del Sur, from the Caribbean to the barrios in the states. X 100PRE is what that conversation sounds like.

When Metallica announced last June that they had recorded a new album with Lou Reed, fans of both artists responded with confusion, if not outright despair. But while this partnership may seem random, the two actually have a lot in common. Both abuse electric guitars; both like to wear black and be photographed by Anton Corbijn; both have indulged in lifestyles that threatened to become death-styles; both have a habit of alienating their fans by taking ill-advised stylistic detours and, by extension, both are considered by many to be class-A assholes. But while these surface similarities may provide the two parties with small-talk/commiseration fodder when, say, hanging backstage before murdering "Sweet Jane" at a Rock and Roll Hall of Fame induction ceremony, they're pretty miserable grounds for a full-on collaboration, especially one that spans two discs and close to 90 minutes. And yet, showing their usual proud disregard for their fans and music in general, Lou Reed and Metallica have gone and made Lulu anyway.

It'd be one thing if Lulu were being slipped into the marketplace as a low-profile curiosity, akin to a 90s-era spoken word album with some alt-rocker screeching away in the background. Instead, it's being trumpeted by its makers as a historic event. In a now-infamous interview, James Hetfield and Lars Ulrich recall bursting into tears of pride during the recording sessions, while in another Reed grinningly insists that Metallica has "pushed me to the best I've ever been." It was one of many unintentional jokes in an online promo campaign that effectively ruined Lulu's chances of being taken seriously before it was even heard.

Lulu was first previewed with an especially repellent 30-second tract of "The View" that confirmed everyone's worst suspicions of the project-- namely, that Reed's crotchety, atonal poem-rants would be wholly incompatible with Metallica's fidgety riffage. The clip's most prominent lyric ("Throw it away/ For worship someone who actively despises you!") seemed to mock both artists' most forgiving fans for even clicking on the link. By the time "The View" was released in its full, five-minute ghastliness-- with Hetfield variously professing himself to be a table, a 10-story building and, possibly, the premier member of Philly hip-hop band the Roots-- the Internet had all the evidence it needed to preemptively crown Lulu the Worst Album of All Time.

But even in that regard, Lulu disappoints. For all the hilarity that ought to ensue here, Lulu is a frustratingly noble failure. Audacious to the extreme, but exhaustingly tedious as a result, its few interesting ideas are stretched out beyond the point of utility and pounded into submission-- the average song length clocks in at eight excruciating minutes. Still, it's kind of fascinating to hear two veteran entities trying like hell to excavate common ground that simply does not exist.

Lulu's source material-- a series of transgressive plays by Munich playwright Frank Wedekind about a stripper who becomes a social-climber only to wind up a prostitute-- allows Reed to set a familiar Berlin scene with "Brandenburg Gate", a would-be anthem that, with a less torturous delivery, could almost pass for something from Reed's mid-1970s songbook. Instead, we get Hetfield belting out its "small town girl" chorus like he's trying to summon the next featured attraction at a strip club.

Reed's influence also feels responsible for the ominous, omnipresent Velvets-esque string textures and a couple of curiously avant guitar solos from Kirk Hammett (see: "Dragon"). Metallica, meanwhile, inspired Reed to come up with at least one perfectly metal lyric ("I cry icicles in my stein"), while getting him to update the S&M suggestiveness of "Venus in Furs" to the bloodlusty standards of the modern-day headbanger. However, a great deal of Lulu's songs find Reed graphically describing violent, depraved sexual trysts from the female protagonist's perspective, and with lines like "I will swallow your sharpest cutter like a colored's man dick" in abundance, some dyed-in-the-denim Metallica fans could be squirming like they did when Kirk started wearing eyeliner.

Unfortunately, these small surprises can't save Lulu from the much larger issue that lies directly at its core: For most of the record, Lou Reed and Metallica barely sound like they're on the same planet, let alone in the same room; the album works neither as powerful rock music nor as an impressionistic soundtrack to a spoken narrative. Reed's monotone remains unresponsive to what's happening around him whether the occasion calls for full-torque thrash ("Mistress Dread") or dreary acoustic mood pieces ("Little Dog"), while Lars Ulrich's flailing fills during the breakdowns on "Pumping Blood" and "Frustration" are essentially drummerese for "what the fuck do I do with this?" But for all of Reed's meandering, a-melodic verbosity, it's actually Hetfield who sounds the most out of place here; beyond his self-parodic turn on "The View", he contributes intrusive back-ups to the bar-band slog "Iced Honey" and the maddeningly repetitious "Cheat on Me" like someone in the back row of a class photo trying to mug his way into the frame.

Remarkably, there is actually a light at the end of this dark, despairing tunnel-- and, not coincidentally, it's the song least connected to the Lulu concept. Clocking in at an absurd 19 minutes, "Junior Dad" is-- like almost everything else here-- too long by half, with its last eight minutes taken up by an extended string drone. But, despite its laughable title, "Junior Dad" possesses everything the rest of Lulu doesn't: a graceful, affecting melody, a logical arrangement, a pretty guitar line, a sympathetic narrator and, most importantly, a true synthesis of each principal's strengths, outfitting a Reed streetwise hymn with Metallica's stadium-sized crunch; it's like "Street Hassle" refashioned as a Black Album power ballad. "Junior Dad" is a song that seemingly does the impossible: it momentarily redeems the idea of a Lou Reed/Metallica collaboration as a plausible, potentially fruitful concept. But its late appearance also serves as a potent reminder of just how terribly that concept is executed on everything that precedes it.

Alright, this is bullshit. I've had it. Is this what we've been reduced to? Michigan metalheads copping ESPN Jock Jams*, capitalizing on the shameful worst of the 1980s and bellowing incessantly about the wondrous virtues of the all-nighter? Rock critics who dissed this entire genre in its heyday now glorifying its second coming as somehow superior? If this is what the future of music has in store for us, why no apocalypse on New Year's Eve '99? Doesn't God care? Shit, maybe Y2K really* was Armageddon, launching us headfirst into a great black xFC-metal abyss, and maybe Andrew W.K. is just the first of four pending horsemen.

And that, boys and girls, was about all I could muster on March 20th, just as the stormclouds began to crash together for what would soon spin into a torrential whirlwind of one-sheets and NMEs-- maybe one of the scariest hypes this planet's ever seen. I was overwhelmed!

But now it's July, and almost as quickly as he arrived, Andrew Wilkes-Krier has been rudely ushered off the Apollo soundstage and scribbled as a footnote into history's textbook of rock novelties. Been months since I last heard "Party Hard" on the radio or saw WK thrashing about on M2 like a hyperactive retarded kid whose parents failed to give him a disciplinary shaking. If it hadn't been for this meddling CD-R I was sent by Island Records' promotions team, I might already have forgotten the guy. Ahh, but yes, in due time. I take immense comfort in the realization that, at some distant point in the future, I won't be able to recall any of I Get Wet, and whether that'll be due to its legitimate forgetability or a future struggle with Alzheimer's I don't much care, so long as I never again have to envision his mangy "RAW is WAR" hairswath (wash it!), or listen to these unshakable cro-magnon shoutathons. And so, this is where I get to say that, as evidenced in italics above, I almost told you so.

A few weeks prior to my first attempt at taking down this sorry sack, my old pal Brent DiCrescenzo, who as a culture addict spends a fair bit of his spare time scouring the British music rags, had swung by to write up the Promise Ring's Wood/Water. He'd read about I Get Wet in Mojo or something, and saw it amongst the promo stacks on my windowsill. "Have you heard this?"

Now, Brent and I like to hook up and get cynical from time to time-- we'll even bash the bands we're into just for shits-- so I was patiently waiting for D to reel one off so I could start in, casting to the wind that fact that I, in fact, hadn't yet heard it. "It's pretty funny, it's basically these huge guitar riffs, sort of soccer anthems." He quickly unloaded Von Bohlen from the disc-changer (well into Wood/Water's second half, any excuse would have sufficed) and tossed in the CD-R. Instantly, blaring multitracked guitars and shooting-range stadium drums came accosting. I tried to yell something, but my exclamation was swallowed by the immense wind-tunnel attack of the clenched-fist maelstrom.

"WHAT?"

It was hopeless. Nothing could penetrate a sound that dense. I was overcome. I tried to remember the last time anyone dared to push rock so poppily over the top, and figured it must have been some time around Hysteria. I sat rapt by the simple barbarity of that sound, Andrew barking adamantly over the exploding plastic fury. The gall! WK demanded respect, whether he deserved it or not. His conviction was startling, and the sound so scrutinously polished it lapped itself back into rawness. Indeed, it was time to party.

The party, as it just so happened, lasted all of three minutes-- appropriately, about the same lifespan as a pinch of Big League Chew. For this was bubblegum in its purest, stickiest form, designed for the sole purpose of imminent pop. To be packaged, marketed, and shipped by a grand corporation, and to be enjoyed by the consumer for a few moments before being spit or swallowed. I spat, and with the poisonous substance expelled from my system, I saw it for what it is:

I Get Wet is an insidious beast, planting itself into the deepest instinctual recesses of your brainstem, where it instantly detonates in a visceral adrenal charge. There is suddenly no respect for proper behavior, just the urge to turn acrobatic flips and smash everything within a fifty-foot radius. You're Genghis Khan in the San Dimas Sportmart somersaulting over Nike racks to the Slippery When Wet synth-metal of Beethoven's Schmidt Music foray into Bachman-Turner Overdrive. And then you wake up the next morning, hazy-headed and groggy, humiliated by the preceding night's incidents. Don't blame yourself. This music is evil in its purest form, wafting through air, waiting to possess every decent person in the entire room until they're flat on their backs in bed, wrists tied to the headboard, with drunken priests standing holy at their sides to exorcise the demon.

And the demon is a tricky sonofabitch, spinning you in circles of confusion and chanting its life-affirming message to brainwash you into truly believing, right to the core of your soul, that what it speaks is the Good Truth. Read any interview with WK (they're all the same-- just like the songs!) in which he spews naïve positivity like dad's warbly old self-help cassettes. There is no irony about Andrew. He is, in fact, so earnest it sends any straight-thinking individual into epileptic fits of shivers and winces. For christ's sake, the man opens the second paragraph of his self-writ bio with "I will work every day to feel O.K." before finally getting around to calling the music "perfect" because "all it wants is for people to be happy." LIES!

This here is about as empty as rock music gets, right down to the tinny, digitally processed tonebank noise that passes for 'guitars.' You think otherwise? Then let's have a moment to look at the obvious points of reference-- the songs and bands to which I Get Wet rightfully owes a sizable chunk of its royalties:

Def Leppard: "Pour Some Sugar on Me"
Oooooh, in the name of love! This one boomed from your older sister's boyfriend's Thunderbird all 1987 long. You'd look out on the driveway with envy from your bedroom window. Dude is BAD!, you'd mouth, examining just exactly the angle and velocity at which he'd bang that head, his bleached-blonde mane tossing about in a fire-eyed, glorious salute to Rick Allen's one-armed colossus. But that one time he drove you to your girlfriend's house and you excitedly rummaged through his tapes, you saw truth in his glove compartment: this guy only listened to Def Leppard! And you turned to him wondering, "Hey, don't you have any real rock in here?" And that's when he stomped the brake and charlie-horsed your bicep with the force of ten silverbacks.

Gary Glitter: "Rock & Roll, Part Two"
You know this one, even if you don't know it by name. Bah-badahhhhhh-- HAY! Bah-badah. And repeat. That's all there is to this one, kiddies. You hear it at soccer games. Maybe football half-times, too, or anywhere there's a bunch of boneheaded fools spraying each other with keg nozzles in fits of homoerotic glory. "HAY!," the song's sacred battle cry, really drives home the victory, even when the hometeam gets their ass handed to 'em by Kansas City. You only need to hear one bar of this song to know it forward and back for the rest of your days. It also screams "beer" louder than any Anheiser-Busch logo or beef-eating Steelers fan un-pantsing himself to reveal a secret team-praising message on his pimpled asscheeks.

Baha Men: "Who Let the Dogs Out?"
A song whose chorus roused Arsenio crowds and 6-year-olds with the life-bending lyric, "OOF! OOF! OOF OOF!" Like an inescapable, overlong Geico commercial booming from Jeeps, Escalades and Honda Civics across this nation's every city, "Who Let the Dogs Out?" was at once your worst nightmare and the everyman's personal nirvana. If this song had a verse, it was added as an afterthought to give this asinine catchphrase the illusion of being an actual song. And it's not over yet: I'm thinking three months tops before we see it pushing Beggin' Strips between 'boot camp' segments on Maury.

Hmm, incriminating. Not the kind of legacy one works toward securing, and certainly not the kind of music you'd find in the collection of any self-respecting rock elitist. In fact, if I knew a rock elitist with this record, I'd smack them up 'long side the head, 'cause who the fuck are you to tell me I can't own the Sophie B. Hawkins "Damn, I Wish I Was Your Lover" CD5 when just last week you subjected the entire fucking interstate to "Fun Night"? I'll cripple ya!

And yet, some of these 'punk' and 'indie' kids are still willing to back WK up with a number of ridiculous excuses that they deep-down know are inherently flawed. "It's catchy" is no kind of argument. Every pop song you've ever truly hated is catchy. "It's ironic" is wack, too, since there's exactly zero irony to be had on any of I Get Wet or in WK's motivational interviews. "It's fun" is about the only legitimate excuse a guy could come up with-- and that's the one thing I'll give it to warrant the .6 in the rating-- but this world of music which history has graced us with is loaded with fun music. Even fun music with substance, fun music that doesn't talk to you like you're some kinda total dipshit that wouldn't know Boredoms from buzzworthy. And you don't even have to look that hard! So then, what is the excuse for a typically elitist music nerd to bow to Andrew WK's blistering tard-rock? That's right, folks: there isn't one.

Like most people, I hate being bored. I'm shackled to whim, a slave to fancy, perpetually impatient, high strung, and terrified of tedium. As a makeshift cure, I've developed an attention span that rivals a hyperactive prepubescent Christian Scientist. It's not ideal, but at least I'm occupied most of the time. Of course, the key word there is "most." Snags are hit every time I'm forced to stand in hellish lines, endure overlong anecdotes from friends and strangers alike, and withstand multiple listens of records I would otherwise turn off before the first track was finished.

Alpha's sophomore album, The Impossible Thrill, is emblematic of the latter example. If having to write about Bristolian trip-hop is taxing, having to listen to it enough to get to that step is brutal-- especially when the material in question makes unintentional strides toward epitomizing dullness.

By bombarding the listener with innocuousness, Alpha forge a test to determine exactly when the pedestrian becomes excruciating. By the third track, they more or less have their answer. The Impossible Thrill is so pig-headed in its goal to evoke mood that conventions like variation, song structure and memorable songwriting are completely forgone.

The album's redundancy is particularly inappropriate because of its premise. Instead of continuing on a beat-heavy, electronic path to atmosphere, Alpha employ mostly live instrumentation to augment the rich, bluesy arrangements. Layers of strings glaze the songs, and are heavily depended upon to set the dour, spacy tone. The Impossible Thrill sifts through the constituents of pop trip-hop, exploits its darkness, and ultimately lacks any semblance of groove. A song stringed as manipulatively as "Dim" plays like a reject Blaxploitation theme. And, when the occasional dank beat from a drum machine does pop up, like on "South," it only retreads the same sterile fare we've heard a million times before from artists like Hooverphonic and Morcheeba.

The vocalists on the record, Helen White, Wendy Stubbs, and Martin Barnard, only contribute to the drabness. The interchangeable White and Stubbs both exhibit the conviction of mumbling somnambulists. Though aiming to recall a more drugged-out Beth Gibbons, the two never muster anything greater than "wispy." Barnard's approach is more affected, but just as unmoving. With the vocals low in the mix, it's hard to hear exactly what he's (seemingly) complaining about. And, when the rest of the content is taken into account, it's even harder to care.

The Impossible Thrill is utterly pedestrian and overwrought. Though the songs are mostly composed gracefully, with each part impeccably interlocking, this ultimately can't erase the record's inherent mundaneness. But at least the album lives up to its name; with the knowledge that the thrill is indeed unattainable, it's clear that adventure is best sought in virtually any other outlet.


Relevance in music is overrated. As far as I can tell, it's usually an excuse to say, "I don't understand this," or, "This isn't cool," and very rarely an actual signifier of the importance something has within a greater context. Furthermore, often very interesting ideas can be swept under the rug at the behest of greater "relevance": where was common sense when Mozart couldn't get a gig, or when Decca passed up signing the Beatles in 1962 because "guitar pop was on the way out"? Of course, you can't really blame the folks who missed out, because they really weren't doing anything worse than living within the framework of their society, and how can anyone really do better?

That said, Henry Rollins' latest release, Nice, is utterly irrelevant in the context of almost every other album reviewed at Pitchfork. It's too macho to be indie, too rock to be punk, too "in your face, to tha X-treme" to be current, too Guitar Center to be Amoeba. It is certainly too Rollins to be subtle or multi-dimensional. Sure, the guy has come a long way since Black Flag, but in the wrong direction. You'd think someone with his IQ (I can't vouch for that, but a couple of his spoken word routines had things to ponder) would either 1) find a way to channel his energy into music with as much, 2) find a ways make something that didn't recall David Lee Roth solo albums, or 3) very quickly find a way to make his yell-song vocal stylings more interesting by, I don't know, not yelling every single song, all the time.

Now, just because Rollins doesn't sound like he has a place among the new rock canon doesn't mean that his album is bad. But it is one of the least interesting things I've heard in a while-- and that includes Terry Bradshaw and Paul McCartney at the Superbowl. I suppose there is something to be said for him sticking to his guns and all, but that's all I'm going to say about that at the moment.

"Hangin' Around," "One Shot" and "What's the Matter, Man" are all heavy rockers, featuring a more-hyped-up-than-usual Rollins over the top (literally, of course). However, what really links these tunes is that they could all be featured under a WWF highlight reel. The band plays with a lot of energy, though are necessarily in the background to accommodate Rollins' yelp. Guitars crunch, drums play fills that would make Terry Bozio proud, and if muscle is your mode, it may work. However, Rollins drops lines like, "What's hard to an alien man?/ Well, you never know what's real" (huh?) and, "I am calm hot animal/ Gratefully guilty as charged" (I see), and turns a perfectly acceptable cock-rock session into Incredibly Bad Poetry.

A couple of left turns do spice up the mix: "Up for It" is something of a James Brown tribute, with faux-"Mother Popcorn" guitar and slinky groove ("The day to day can become such a trip/ The mediocre can make you lose your grip"-- now he tells me). Rollins does the Godfather one better by bringing in some Pointer Sisters-esque background singers (!) and uttering the phrase "I'm up for it" not less than 28 times during the song. "I Want So Much More" starts out on a bad foot (James Brown would never do that) by letting us know that Rollins "want[s] so much more" four times at the beginning of the song, and retaining the soul singers (who, to their credit, are probably doing as well with the material as you could expect). However, its down-tempo groove, machine gun trumpet hits (yes) and ornery sax solo do make it something of a 70s cop-show back-alley-chase soundtrack. Anyway, it's the most distinctive tune on the disc, so enjoy it while it lasts.

Other tunes range from rigid, fake Zep ("Hello") to by-the-numbers punk ("Gone Inside the Zero"), which should be a surprise, though music probably isn't Rollins' main game. In fact, I wonder what would happen if Rollins were to ever attempt making another punk record. He seems to have plenty to say, and the energy level thing won't be an issue. The funny thing with him is that since he doesn't seem to care about his image anymore (which could be cool in itself), you'd think he'd be making records that challenged someone's idea of what new rock sounded like. No dice, but don't lose faith, because Rollins wants so much more. He wants so much more. Henry Rollins wants so much more.


Three years after their commercial breakthrough, Bleed American, Jimmy Eat World's fifth full-length represents what I hope is the final stage in emo's devolution. The songs have deep titles like "Work", "Kill", and "Pain". They're about girls, girls, and (possibly) painkillers. They range from ponderous ballads ("Drugs or Me") to navel-gazing, midtempo tunes (the title track) to rockers that sound like watered-down versions of the band's earlier rockers ("Nothing Wrong", "Just Tonight"). I guess you could call "Night Drive", with its late-period Folk Implosion beats, an example of a band "maturing." But then singer/guitarist Jim Adkins opens his mouth: "Do you feel bad like I feel bad?"

Lyrically, the rest of the album isn't much better. To a drug-addled lover, Adkins croons, "Stay with me/ You're the one I need." To an apathetic lover: "Your votes can mean something." To an easy lover: "Lay back, baby, and we'll do this right." To no one in particular: "Baby, this is who I am/ Sorry, but I can't just go turn off how I feel." If that's not bad enough, he even conjures the least-poetic expression of jealous ever: "I'm sure your kiss remains employed."

Things haven't always been quite this bad from Jimmy Eat World. The best moments on earlier albums such as Static Prevails and Clarity weren't Shakespeare, but they communicated universes of longing to awkward kids. "The Middle" is also an obscenely catchy bit of pop, despite the greater indie community's cred-conscious dismissal of it. But there's none of that here. Futures is like a rotten onion, revealing layer upon layer of foulness. Musically, Jimmy Eat World have gone overboard with the trick they learned from U2: keep something somewhere jingling the same notes over and over again. Adkins' vocals are as whiny as ever, but here they sound canned as well. And then there's the would-be hipster nod to Heatmiser's "Not Half Right" on the swooning Smallville balladry of "Kill" ("like your favorite Heatmiser song said/ It's just like being alone"). Elliott Smith's only been dead for a year, guys-- a little respect, please.

"I'm in love with the ordinary," Adkins acknowledges on "The World You Love". That's not necessarily a bad thing; one of the year's finest album's, The Streets' A Grand Don't Come for Free, is kicked off by nothing more earth-shattering than a broken TV. Yet there's a difference between romanticizing the ordinary-- a bad cell phone connection, say, or that feeling on a first date that goes really, really well-- and being, well, ordinary. And it's hard to think of an album more mundane than Futures.

The Cribs are three English Brothers-- Ryan, Gary, and Ross Jarman-- who have purportedly been playing together since 1989 (when they were ages nine, nine, and five). The insert from their second CD features three carefully sloppy young men, their eyes just peeking out behind stray locks, looking contemplative, chugging beer, doing headstands, playing guitar while crowd surfing, and generally bathing themselves in empty singnifiers. An album of candid songs from in front of the family fireplace seems unlikely.

None of that matters as long as they've got the tunes, though, right? They don't. The Cribs put all their cards on the table before the first track is finished. "Hey Scenesters" features good ol' staccato Telecaster angular-ass guitars, a danceable beat, and a shout-along hook, not to mention an echo-drenched vocal counter-melody for maximum catchiness. Singer Ryan Jarman doesn't try too hard, of course, lest the band reveal some trace of passion or ability. Maybe they think deriding "scenesters" in the lyrics to such a derivative song is a clever bit of irony; it's actually just transparent, and it doesn't let them off the hook.

Or maybe it's lost on them entirely. I'd believe it, given the naive mimcry of some of these songs. The Strokes imitations are frequent and blatant, though they bring a cheeky amateurism to their priacy, if nothing else. "I'm Alright Me" and "We Can No Longer Cheat You" are all slurred vowels and trebley downstrokes, but with the swaying, off-key chorus of "We Can No Longer Cheat You", it's difficult to criticise because it's difficult to even take seriously. The title track, however, borrows so liberally-- right down to the solo not-a-drum-machine drumming before each verse-- it's hard to imagine a live audience not laughing out loud.

The band seems more at home playing for punters and having them shouting in the background, with woozy bloke-rock like "Martell" and "It Was Only Love" hitting more of a comfort zone. Their sloppy pub-rock is less deserving of ire, and yet no more deserving of a listen.

by Ian Cohen
Contributor
EXPERIMENTAL
ROCK
NOVEMBER 21 2011
On this EP of odds and ends-- featuring guest spots from Neon Indian, Bear in Heaven, Nicole Atkins, and an xx cover-- each entry offers its own set of errant artistic impulses. (together) is impossible to dislike only because it's impossible to take it seriously.

Prior to the release of Burst Apart, the Antlers' Peter Silberman delivered a track-by-track breakdown of his band's gorgeous, subtly gripping record to Drowned in Sound-- the explanation of "Rolled Together" was particularly revelatory on three levels. First off, this is a pretty strange exercise for a lyricist as blunt as Silberman-- rarely does an Antlers song leave much to the imagination in regards to "what it's about." Secondly, he went on to call it the result of an obsession with Boards of Canada, which also struck me as odd since it sounds almost exactly like Sigur Rós' "Svefn-G-Englar". Lastly, he described the track as "best heard stoned with friends." If so, while "Rolled Together" is Burst Apart's musical centerpiece, it's the thematic outlier on a record that speaks about sex and alcohol in an unusually austere and often negative manner, endorsing solitude and emotional sobriety as a corrective to the inevitable turmoil each brings. "Rolled Together" is better understood as the jumping off point for the odds and sods collection of the (together) EP, since it proves that, despite what *Hospice *and Burst Apart may have led you to believe, Silberman isn't holed up in a Brooklyn apartment waiting for his heart to be atomized between albums.

That's not to say drugs were clearly a major influence here-- but the indie rock remix album is pretty much on the level of a bowl-passing session or drum circle in terms of pastimes that can be enjoyed only by the people directly participating in them. Hospice and Burst Apart were closed narrative circuits, so any sort of mixed bag from Antlers was bound to be jarring, and indeed, each entry into this hodgepodge of refurbishments, live performances, and outtakes exhibits its own unique set of errant artistic impulses. Take their cover of the xx's "VCR", for instance. Look beyond the fact that sampling, remixing, or covering the xx is quickly becoming a tiresome rite of passage and remember why the impact of xx continues to manifest: While the songwriting was surely exquisite, its striking minimalism, romantic candor, and sonic intimacy still cuts through the indistinct clutter many of the bands reinterpreting their music don't even realize they're responsible for. Problem isn't that the version here stays true to none of the original's artistic ideals, but it doesn't even sound like "VCR" reconfigured to the Antlers specs of passionate, electronic pop-- everything gets soused in a whorl of reverb, to the point where a Doppler effect on Silberman's vocals is the only thing breaking through. For whatever reason, the same tactics are applied to "I Don’t Want Love (Peter's Version)".  Where the sleek and silvery contours of the original added a layer of resolute determination to the narrator's conflicted take on physical attachment, the solo version just turns maudlin and ponderous under its blown-out echo, something akin to hearing the guy down the hall work through cover versions of Grace.

While those two are at odds with their expressive underpinning, the reduxes of "Parentheses" and "French Exit" unwisely ignore any sort of emotional context altogether, and Silberman simply becomes a trebly sound effect amidst tumbling, metallic loops. But those all serve as prelude to the physical bulk of (together), tied up in three consecutive in-studio collaborations whose combined length nearly equals that of Burst Apart. Take your pick as to what's the more glaring sign of a total quality-control void-- the motley collage serving as the cover art or the nearly two minutes of studio chatter and dead air that precedes each live cut. And yet, they still sound like they could've used more time to plan things out: previously, "Hounds" was an impossibly delicate meditation on fresh wounds and codependent fragility, but Nicole Atkins' interjections of husky blues notes triggers the same sort of nose-wrinkling gag reflex of taking a shot of straight vodka. And there's a time and place for Alan Palomo to test out the wild oscillations of his homemade synths-- namely, Neon Indian songs. Here, they simply break the beatific spell of "Rolled Together" before the Antlers lock into its mixed-meter sway (which features some pretty nifty falsetto swoops), at which point you forget he's even there.

And yet, it's the most blatantly self-indulgent song here that makes (together) ultimately impossible to truly dislike, because it's ultimately impossible to truly take seriously. And that would be a version of "Parentheses" with Bear in Heaven that would've been the second-longest track on Lulu, and to its credit, one of the least grueling*.* Even in the post-CD age, we've become accustomed to marathon song lengths housing a bit of false advertising, but there's no hidden track, no gaping vacuum of silence, just literally 18 minutes of the Antlers and Bear in Heaven jamming on "Parentheses", at its core a three-and-a-half-minute song based on a single drum loop. Frankly, I'm surprised they made it all the way to the end-- halfway through listening, I could get a snack or check my email. They didn't have that option.

Look*, (together)* is borderline unlistenable taken as a whole, but it actually makes me like Burst Apart even more, since I can add "tremendously edited" to its long list of redeeming qualities. And really, it's less of an indictment of the Antlers as it is of (together)'s format. After all, the Antlers have produced a total of two great records since 2009, approximately two more than the entire cottage industry of indie remix albums has in its history. You know, drug abuse, divorce, war, and death all get a bad rap, but somehow they've succeeded in inspiring great art for 40 or so minutes, where letting a couple of friends fuck with your songs has failed about 100% of the time.

A year on from the breakout YouTube single "Gucci Gucci", Kreayshawn returns with her major label debut. It would be difficult to argue that Somethin' Bout Kreay is a waste of Kreayshawn's talent, because talent has been something of a non-factor in her story.

Natassia Zolot, the 22-year-old Oakland rapper known as Kreayshawn, rose to popularity in exceedingly modern fashion, but we've known how to describe her career since before she was born. She's a quintessential one-hit wonder for the digital age-- a girl who accidentally recorded a near-perfect pop-rap hit and followed it with a hollow thud of a record. If her breakout YouTube single, "Gucci Gucci", tore a hole in the conventions of pop and hip-hop, Somethin' Bout Kreay is the awkward seam that sticks out once someone has tried to sew it back up with some expensive twine.

Somethin' Bout Kreay would elicit the embarrassment of, say, walking in on a younger sibling dancing awkwardly in front of her bedroom mirror, were its shrill clatter not so forcefully distracting. These are dance songs so strident that no one could ever hope to move to them, pop songs so thin that no one could choose lines worth singing along to, rap verses so fumbly that practically anyone could rewrite them and make them better. Excepting "Gucci Gucci"-- which shoots out of the mess like a geyser of glitter-- each track can be appreciated primarily for the relief it offers from the previous clunker. To put things into perspective, Lil Debbie, Kreayshawn's mannequin twin of a sidekick, is currently making music miles catchier than Somethin' Bout Kreay, while Gucci Mane and Kreayshawn associate V-Nasty's BAYTL, lyrically speaking, might as well be Watch the Throne in comparison. Imagine watching the "Gucci Gucci" video for the first time and knowing that in the near future-- just about a year later-- you'd be nostalgic for how traditional, how authentic, it felt. Time can move in strange, unsettling ways.

While she's always been discussed in a hip-hop context, Kreayshawn doesn't so much rap here as half-sing or speak. She sounds as though she's been called on in class to read aloud, sometimes short of breath, often painfully off-key and off-beat ("beat" here usually meaning a fizzy, atonal thump). The closest she comes to rapping is on the female-revenge anthem "Left Ey3", where her presence is almost offensively performative. "I should key your car/ But I'd rather slap your mom/ Only a bitch could give birth to such a fuckin' dog," she shouts. Later in the song, during a rare moment of 2 Chainz-like hilarity, she raps: "I'm Lorena Bobbitt chillin' in your bed/ I'm Britney Spears off hella drugs/ And I just shaved my head."

Elsewhere she's a deer in the headlights, lost and meandering through half-assed boasts about how much gold she's got, dismissing her haters and forcing out unmemorable lines that make zero sense. "Them white girls keep on mobbin'/ Yeah we do, your chance is over/ But not to be my lover/ All them haters ask me what I'm doing/ I just simply tell them, 'Kreaysonic,'" she says on "K234YSONIXZ", a song that is unlistenable in spite of a beat reminiscent of Salt-n-Pepa's classic "Push It" and a hook pulled from J. J. Fad's "Supersonic". At some point, on tepid New Orleans bounce homage "Twerkin'", we even run into Diplo, a fish out of water, trying to rap: "And we slow it down/ Slappin' on the bass/ Baby drop your booty down/ Til your booty's lower case," he mutters.

It would be difficult to argue that Somethin' Bout Kreay is a waste of Kreayshawn's talent, because talent has been something of a non-factor in her story. If anything, "Gucci Gucci" helped usher in an era of artists for whom "talent" is beside the point, artists who've triumphantly remapped a hierarchy of values so that charm, branding savvy, and novelty rule supreme. Kreayshawn is one of the first of these artists forced to reconcile her own wiles with tradition in the form of a full-length album on a major label. And the final product finds her allure and charisma entirely lost in translation.

Which is a shame, because in spite of all the dismayed chatter that has enveloped her since she arrived, Kreayshawn's charisma is a special force. Take, for instance, this joyful montage of home videos shot during her childhood and uploaded this summer, where she's pictured belting the lyrics to Nas' "Oochie Wally" alongside one of her girlfriends, pointing the camera toward a mirror, showing off her pets and her Playstation. It should feel familiar, hypnotizing even, to anyone (girls in particular) for whom youth included a lot of boredom, Top 40 radio, bulky camcorders, and a dial-up internet connection. A decade later, her antennae are still tuned to the same channels, her sensibilities still perfectly translating the whimsical stoned-kid-in-a-candy-store experiences of sitting on the internet, choosing outfits with your friends, and blasting the music that makes you happiest. That's the joy we couldn't take our eyes away from when we first learned who Kreayshawn was, and a joy that is entirely absent on her album. She may never get an opportunity to relocate it-- Somethin' Bout Kreay could very well be her first and last.

Miley Cyrus and Her Dead Petz is a free 23-track album—written and recorded outside the governance of Miley Cyrus' label and co-produced in large part by Wayne Coyne and other Flaming Lips members. It is the definition of a vanity project, an indulgent collection of experiments that exist for no other reason than because they can.

Miley Cyrus and Her Dead Petz dropped from the sky to cap off last weekend’s Cyrus-hosted VMA Awards like so much phallically-deployed glitter. The free 23-track album, written and recorded outside the governance of Cyrus' label and co-produced in large part by Wayne Coyne and other Flaming Lips members, appeared on Sunday accompanied by a New York Times interview where Cyrus detailed its making. In it, she recalls being told by her team that the album was too long. She proceeded to add "Miley Tibetan Bowlzzz", as an impetuous reminder that Cyrus plays by no one’s rules but her own. That pretty much says it all: Dead Petz is the definition of a vanity project, an indulgent collection of experiments that exist for no other reason than because they can.

It would be hard to imagine Cyrus and Coyne’s talents combining to worse results: there’s nothing here as pleasant as her appearances on the Flaming Lips’ Sgt. Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club Band cover album last year, nor are these collaborations audacious enough to fail in exciting ways. Mostly they are tossed-off Diet Yoshimi detritus, the kind of music these guys can fart out in their sleep. There are bright spots, many of them via former mentor Mike WiLL Made It’s handful of productions. But on the whole Dead Petz is a borderline unlistenable slog through dorm-room poncho bullshit and blissfully ignorant acid koans ("Can’t you see, all the clouds are dying?"), delivered earnestly from an ex-child star seemingly unaware of how fundamentally inseparable her own privilege is from her "do whatever the fuck you want all of the time" ethos, and enabled by a 54 year old who should know better.

Take "Dooo It!", the album's single of sorts. There's a lot going on in the track—weed, flying saucers, queries about the origins of the moon—but the part I keep coming back to is Cyrus proclaiming, "Peace, motherfuckerz! Do it!" Far be it for me to dash the idealistic, psilocybin-fueled dreams of a 22-year-old multi-millionaire whose emancipatory phase has swerved from ratchet-lite twerk ambassador to proudly pansexual LGBTQ advocate and Wayne Coyne bestie: she’s figuring it out, as 22-year olds do, though rarely from such a precipitous platform. But still: "Do it!" As if it were just that simple.

But that’s why having an editor is important, and why "No parents! No rules!" is almost always better as a slogan than as a creative mode. "Self-control is not something I am working on," Cyrus trills on Mike WiLL cut "Slab of Butter (Scorpion)", and while she seems to be having a blast, we are left with the utterly pointless witch-house skid mark "Fuckin Fucked Up" (not to be confused with "I’m So Drunk"), and "BB Talk", a rambling monologue that wastes one of the album’s few salvageable hooks. "1 Sun"  namedrops Grace Jones alongside tuneless invocations to "Wake up, world! Can’t you see the earth is crying?" There is a twee piano ballad about a dead blowfish friend, who her human friends eat at sushi dinner. The circle of life, man. (She fake-cries at the end.)

Presumably, Cyrus will look back on all this and laugh, having learned something about herself and about making art, and move on, as she seems to have done with 2013’s Bangerz. And there are moments of promise here—most often, when Coyne backs off a bit. She’s much better at love songs than drug songs. "Space Boots" streamlines the album’s cosmic vibes into an electro pulse somewhere between Kavinsky and Rilo Kiley, with sweet, direct lyrics that pierce through the fog of bullshit: "I get so high cause you’re not here smokin’ my weed/ And I get so bored/ Cause you’re not here to make me laugh." Best of all is "Lighter", a stunning, '80s-nodding Mike WiLL ballad that poignantly redeems the general "whoa, dude" vibes: "We never get to see ourselves sleeping peacefully next to the ones that we love," she sings. It’s genuinely moving.

Cyrus returns to idealized depictions of sleep and dreams often here, and given how hyper-regimented most of her life must have been, her attraction to relinquishing control to drugs or the subconscious makes sense. But for all the Instagram nudes and real talk about gender and sexuality in the press, very little of Dead Petz reveals much about Cyrus beyond the bacchanalia and non-sequiturs. I can’t shake the sense that Dead Petz exists more as a glorified VMA party favor than as a work that can stand on its own.

Speaking of: the biggest irony of Cyrus’ clash with Nicki Minaj is that if Cyrus were to pay closer attention, she might recognize Minaj as a trailblazer for the career path she's trying to take—a massively famous woman who does things the "wrong" way, pisses a lot of people off in the process, and refuses to give a fuck. As far as surrealist pop albums this decade, it doesn’t get much ballsier than Pink Friday: Roman Reloaded. But the stakes there were huge, and there is literally nothing at stake for Cyrus here. In a way, Dead Petz is a fascinating milemarker of pop music in the post-album, post-Internet era: a major pop album that lands with a splash, then sinks like a brick, as ephemeral as the Tumblr culture Cyrus draws from. Maybe that’s the most visionary aspect of Dead Petz: it feels like it was built to disintegrate.

Underneath it all, the posthumous album from the Florida rapper is woefully aimless and structurally unsound.

At the center of the Jahseh Onfroy story is his domestic violence case, which was never tried but, after his death, is now closed. Before he was shot and killed in an attempted robbery earlier this year, the 20-year-old rapper known as XXXTentacion was accused of physically and mentally abusing his then-girlfriend, terrorizing her, and holding her against her will. He faced charges that included aggravated battery of a pregnant woman, domestic battery by strangulation, false imprisonment, and witness-tampering. According to arrest reports, the victim was punched to the point where her eyes were forced shut.

The charges raised against X didn’t prevent him from becoming one of rap’s most popular new stars, and his death only complicates the conversations surrounding the music of an incredibly polarizing figure. In the aftermath, questions are raised about its lasting impact and how his murder at the age of 20 might change the way he is remembered. Will his art be treated as sacrosanct? In an attempt to rehabilitate his image, Onfroy’s mother started a nonprofit called the XXXTentacion Foundation to provide “relief [for] the poor, distressed and of the underprivileged.” It’s difficult to square this sensationalized, supposedly kind-hearted version of Onfroy with the one recorded admitting to stabbing eight people, the one who allegedly had a woman “scared for her life,” the one who noted, “I will kill that bitch if she play with me.”

If the X estate plans to highlight the rapper’s own characterization as a “problematic genius,” then their first step towards that makeover is to try and push his art to the fore with the release of the posthumous album Skins. Ultimately, it’s a record stripped so bare there’s hardly more in these songs than his uncoordinated instincts. Skins is the worst-case scenario for a posthumous release, not only devoid of meaningful ideas and moving music but making little to no case for its existence in the process.

Musically, there’s nothing complex about what’s happening in X’s songs. His previous lo-fi bedroom recordings, made on what former collaborator Ski Mask the Slump God once called the “worst recording set up,” touted their terrible sound quality and repetitiveness as pillars of naturalism. They are stark in service of power and intimacy. In fact, many of his most popular tracks are decidedly crude, meant to be read as genuine in their incompleteness.

Sometimes it can be hard to tell if these cuts are finished since so many of X’s songs intentionally sounded unfinished. Some of his old songs were apparently first drafts made in only a few minutes, and while Skins was “very close to being done” when X died, you wouldn’t know it by listening. This 10-song, 19-minute run is woefully aimless and structurally unsound. Half the songs don’t have actual verses. At one point, he just screams, “fake eyes, black man,” repeatedly, which wouldn’t be so bad if it didn’t feel entirely witless and underdeveloped. There are a lot of whoas and ohs as dummy text when all else fails.

It’s like a collection of amassed loose-leaf pages with unresolved thoughts and doodles on them. Tracks are more like freeform inner monologues muttered into voice memos and sent as a mass text. Where older XXXTentacion songs, like “Jocelyn Flores”—a half-rapped, half-sung meditation on a fan’s suicide—had dimensionality and were rendered fully, these tracks have no such depth.

At his most captivating, X made music like he was doing an “MTV Unplugged” special for no one but himself. Skins mostly defers to that penchant for tenderness, though there are instances where it channels the fury of hardcore punk, a core tenet of the SoundCloud rap he helped popularize. There’s little to be gained in squaring the vulnerable, would-be soother and sage in some of these songs with the real, savage young man who once claimed he bashed open a gay man’s head in juvie and smeared the man’s blood on his face, just because the man looked at him. But it’s hard to hear X seethe through the rap-rock frenzy of “One Minute” and not consider the implications.

When Kanye, a vocal X fan and supporter, offers his blame-shifting lyrics about how X was wrongfully accused during a guest spot on “One Minute” while X spits and screams the hook, his history wells right back up to the surface. Kanye’s verse seems to continue a two-pronged defense of XXXTentacion’s music: first, suggest that X was a casualty of a call-out culture unwilling to allow for his presumption of innocence, and second, posit that death absolves him of his sins and thus should wipe clean the slate so that his legacy can be written.

All this overlooks X’s own admissions to committing acts of violence, the incalculable role violence played in his rise, and the ways violence seemed to inform the music he was making. Those who would invoke “the aesthetic alibi” on X’s behalf are refusing to acknowledge that the morbid ethos in X’s songs is inextricable from his story. If the very power of his music, in the eyes of his cult-like following, lies in its “realness” then it’s impossible to separate that same music from the real suffering inflicted in its name.

“Emo rap” was the genre that made the biggest gains on Spotify in 2018, and XXXTentacion, as its standard bearer, didn’t live to see its lasting effect. He was synthesizing rap and rock through a process that felt integrative and immersive, a depressive mixing the bluster of hip-hop with the toxicity of third-wave emo. But Skins doesn’t even preserve any of what was affecting about that listening experience. It lacks the same force and is unexceptional in every way. The album never makes a case for X as anything other than a thinly subversive figure and never even rationalizes the baggage that comes saddled with it. X’s musical legacy will forever be interlinked to violence. Skins is merely a shallow attempt to overwrite that legacy gone awry.